A strategic plan for the High Energy Physics Advisory Panel Exploring
the
Quantum
UniversePathways to Innovation 
and Discovery  
in Particle Physics
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel
Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle Physics
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel
Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle Physics
2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel in Denver, August 2023 . Photo: Rowena Smith
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization PanelPreface iii
Now more than ever, particle physics is an international, even global, 
endeavor. The experiments needed to address the most profound 
questions of our field often require resources and cooperation at a 
global scale and can take more than a decade to design and build. 
We found the scope of our charge and the responsibility it represents 
humbling. Throughout our deliberations, we were aware that the  
impact of our recommendations would be felt past the end of the next 
decade and beyond the borders of the US particle physics program. 
The recommended program reflects the consensus of the panel.
The 2014 P5  report laid the foundations for the current particle physics program. Embracing 
its recommendations positioned the US as a leader and strong international partner in 
efforts that encompass neutrino and flavor physics, the study of dark matter and cosmic 
evolution, and collider experiments. The community stands on the threshold of realizing 
the enormous scientific potential of the 2014 P5  program.
At the same time, the community-driven planning process organized by the Division 
of Particles and Fields of the American Physical Society produced a spectrum of exciting 
new ideas for the future. We thank the particle physics community members—in the US 
and abroad—for their dedication and thoughtful input, not only through the community 
planning process, but in numerous town halls, talks, and private communications.
The enthusiasm and engagement of early career participants, both in the planning 
process and in recent town halls, has been truly inspiring. They are the future leaders 
who will bring to life the goals and aspirations outlined in this report.
We strove to craft a balanced program in terms of scientific focus, project timescales, 
and the interplay between ongoing initiatives and the innovation essential for the future. 
Adhering to fiscal constraints means that not every ambitious endeavor can be immedi-
ately realized. Agile, adaptable, and forward-looking projects are essential to the balance. 
Sustained progress over the next decade requires enhanced investment in research, the-
oretical frameworks, critical infrastructure, and emerging technologies. Also crucial is the 
commitment to build a respectful and inclusive community. We hope the resulting program 
enables early career researchers to spearhead progress and shape the future.
We are excited to present our vision for US particle physics, one that builds on recent 
investments and successes, while opening pathways to innovation and discovery in the 
quest to explore the quantum universe.
Respectfully submitted,
2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel
Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle Physics
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization PanelShoj Asai
University of Tokyo
Amalia Ballarino
CERN
Tulika Bose
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Kyle Cranmer
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Francis-Yan Cyr-Racine
University of New Mexico
Sarah Demers
Yale University
Cameron Geddes
Lawrence Berkeley National  
Laboratory
Yuri Gershtein
Rutgers University
Karsten Heeger, Deputy Chair
Yale University
Beate Heinemann
DESY
JoAnne Hewett, HEPAP  chair,  
ex officio until May 2023
SLAC  National Accelerator  
LaboratoryPatrick Huber
Virginia Tech
Kendall Mahn
Michigan State University
Rachel Mandelbaum
Carnegie Mellon University
Jelena Maricic
University of Hawaii at Manoa
Petra Merkel
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory
Christopher Monahan
William & Mary
Hitoshi Murayama, Chair
University of California, Berkeley
Peter Onyisi
University of Texas at Austin
Mark Palmer
Brookhaven National Laboratory
Tor Raubenheimer
SLAC  National Accelerator  
Laboratory/ Stanford University
Mayly Sanchez
Florida State UniversityRichard Schnee
South Dakota School of Mines  
& Technology
Sally Seidel, interim HEPAP  chair,  
ex officio since June 2023
University of New Mexico
Seon-Hee Seo
IBS Center for Underground Physics, 
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory
Jesse Thaler
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Christos Touramanis
University of Liverpool
Abigail Vieregg
University of Chicago
Amanda Weinstein
Iowa State University
Lindley Winslow
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Tien-Tien Yu
University of Oregon
Robert Zwaska
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory
Panel Members v

Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle PhysicsArt Direction, Design and Development
Sandbox Studio, Chicago
Editing
James Dawson
Copy Editing
Marty Hanna
Mural Illustration
Olena Shmahalo
Spot Illustrations
Abigail Malate
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization PanelTable of Contents vii
 iii Preface
 v Panel Members
 ix Executive Summary
 1 1: Introduction
 15 2: The Recommended Particle Physics Program
 30 3: Decipher the Quantum Realm
 46 4: Illuminate the Hidden Universe
 62 5: Explore New Paradigms in Physics 
 77 6: Investing in the Future of Science and Technology
 103 7:  A Technologically Advanced Workforce for Particle  
 Physics and the Nation
 109 8: Budgetary Considerations
 115 Appendix
 142 Full List of Recommendations
 149 Acknowledgements
 150 In Memoriam
Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle Physics
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization PanelExecutive Summary ix
Particle physics studies the smallest constituents of our vast and 
complex universe. At such small scales, the fundamental principles 
of quantum physics prevail. Remarkably, the entire observable uni -
verse, now billions of light years across, was once small enough to 
be quantum in nature. Its quantum history is imprinted on its large-
scale structure. 
Past successes in particle physics have revolutionized our understanding of the universe 
and prompted a new set of questions. Collectively, these questions have spurred the 
construction of state-of-the-art facilities, from particle accelerators to telescopes, that 
will illuminate the profound connections between the very small and the very large. We 
stand on the threshold of a new era of insight and discovery.
The 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel ( P5) was charged with devel-
oping a 10-year strategic plan for US particle physics, in the context of a 20-year global 
strategy and two constrained budget scenarios. An essential source of input was the 2021 
Snowmass Community Planning Exercise organized by the Division of Particles and Fields 
of the American Physical Society. The panel received additional input from several other 
sources, including town hall meetings, laboratory visits, and individual communications. 
We found this input aligned with three overarching science themes. Within each theme we 
identified two focus areas, or science drivers, that represent the most promising avenues 
of investigation for the next 10 to 20 years.
Decipher  
the  
Quantum 
Realm
Elucidate the Mysteries  
of Neutrinos
Reveal the Secrets of  
the Higgs BosonExplore  
New  
Paradigms  
in Physics
Search for Direct Evidence 
of New Particles
Pursue Quantum Imprints  
of New PhenomenaIlluminate  
the  
Hidden  
Universe
Determine the Nature  
of Dark Matter
Understand What Drives 
Cosmic Evolution
Executive Summary x
The community presented P5 with more inspiring and ambitious projects than either 
budget scenario could accommodate. To guide the necessary choices, the panel cate-
gorized projects as small, medium, and large, based on their construction costs to the 
particle physics program. In the large and medium categories, initiatives were first prior-
itized based on individual scientific merit, then design maturity. An expert subcommittee 
independently reviewed the costs, technical risks, and schedule of large projects. The final 
prioritization holistically considered the cost of construction, commissioning, operations, 
and related research support, distributed over a 10- to 20-year period.  
This report outlines an ambitious program balanced across science drivers. A mix of 
large-, medium-, and small-scale experiments ensures a continuous stream of ground-
breaking research with exceptional discovery potential. The time-sequenced plan is sum-
marized in Figure 1. We recommend continuing specific projects, strategically advancing 
some to the construction phase, and delaying others. Where necessary, individual phases 
or elements of a large-scale project are prioritized separately.
A significant consideration in the prioritization process was the execution of proj-
ects begun in the past decade. In addition to operating facilities producing excellent 
science, three major facilities are currently under construction: the High-Luminosity 
Large Hadron Collider ( HL-LHC), the Deep Underground Neutrino Experiment 
(DUNE ), and the Vera C. Rubin Observatory (Rubin). Each plays a crucial role 
in a different facet of the particle physics program. Our partnership in the HL-LHC at 
CERN  will begin to unlock the secrets of the Higgs boson. DUNE  is the centerpiece of a  
decades-long program to reveal the mysteries of elusive neutrinos. This US-hosted in-
ternational project will exploit a unique underground laboratory (now nearing completion) 
and neutrino beams produced at Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (Fermilab). The 
Rubin Observatory Legacy Survey of Space and Time ( LSST ) anchors an ongoing pro-
gram of cosmic surveys. Realizing the full scientific potential of these and other ongoing 
projects is our highest priority.
The panel identified several crucial areas in cosmic evolution, neutrinos, and dark 
matter, where next-generation facilities with dramatically enhanced capabilities could 
have revolutionary impact. 
The Cosmic Microwave Background Stage IV experiment ( CMB-S4) will use 
telescopes sited in Chile and Antarctica to study the oldest light from the beginning of the 
universe. Achieving its goals requires unique US infrastructure at the South Pole. 
Early implementation of a planned accelerator upgrade (Main Injector Ramp 
and Target; ACE-MIRT ) at Fermilab advances the timeline of the DUNE  program. The  
re-envisioned second phase of DUNE , which adds a third underground detector mod-
ule and an upgraded near detector complex, further expands DUNE ’s power and scope 
as a neutrino laboratory. We recommend research and development ( R&D) toward an 
advanced fourth detector that could ultimately expand DUNE ’s physics program.
A comprehensive program that includes a Generation 3 (G3) Dark Matter  
experiment will probe the enigmatic nature of dark matter, which makes up a significant 
portion of the universe’s mass and energy and has been one of the most enduring mys-
teries in modern physics. The recommended program also invests in multi-messenger 
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization PanelExecutive Summary xi
observatories with dark matter sensitivity, including IceCube Gen-2 , and small-scale 
dark matter experiments using innovative technologies.
In the area of colliders, the panel endorses an offshore Higgs factory, located in 
either Europe, including CERN , or Japan, to advance studies of the Higgs boson following 
the HL-LHC while maintaining a healthy onshore particle physics program. The US should 
actively engage in design studies to establish the technical feasibility and cost envelope 
of Higgs factory designs. We recommend that a targeted collider panel review the options 
after feasibility studies converge. At that point, it is recommended that the US commit 
funds commensurate with its involvement in the LHC and HL-LHC.
In addition to these major initiatives, the panel recommends support for a series of 
current and future mid-scale projects related to cosmic evolution, neutrinos, dark 
matter, and quantum imprints of new phenomena. 
Small- and mid-scale projects play an essential role, complementing major facilities 
and ensuring the scientific balance of the proposed US program. Notably, small 
projects can rapidly seize on new opportunities as they arise. To preserve this agility, 
the panel recommends that the Department of Energy ( DOE ) create a new, competitive 
program named Advancing Science and Technology through Agile Experiments 
(ASTAE ) to support a portfolio of small-scale and agile experiments. This pro-
gram complements the successful Mid-Scale Research Infrastructure ( MSRI ) 
and Major Research Instrumentation ( MRI) programs at the National Science 
Foundation ( NSF). We recommend continued support for these vital components of 
the NSF research portfolio.
The panel recommends dedicated R&D to explore a suite of promising future proj-
ects. One of the most ambitious is a future collider concept: a 10 TeV parton center-of-  
momentum ( pCM) collider to search for direct evidence and quantum imprints of new 
physics at unprecedented energies. Turning this concept into a cost-effective, realistic 
collider design demands that we aggressively develop multiple innovative accelerator and 
detector technologies. This process will establish whether a proton, electron, or muon 
accelerator is the optimal path to our goal. 
As part of this initiative, we recommend targeted collider R&D  to establish the 
feasibility of a 10 TeV pCM muon collider . A key milestone on this path is to design a 
muon collider demonstrator facility. If favorably reviewed by the collider panel, such a 
facility would open the door to building facilities at Fermilab that test muon collider design 
elements while producing exceptionally bright muon and neutrino beams. By taking up 
this challenge, the US blazes a trail toward a new future by advancing critical R&D that 
can benefit multiple science drivers and ultimately bring an unparalleled global facility 
to US soil. 
Investing in the scientific workforce and enhancing computational and 
technological infrastructure is crucial. To achieve this goal, funding agencies should 
support programs that foster a supportive, collaborative work environment; help recruit 
and retain diverse talent; and reinforce professional standards. Targeted increases in 
support for theory, general accelerator R&D (GARD ), instrumentation, and com-
puting will bolster areas where US leadership has begun to erode. These areas align with  
Executive Summary xii
national initiatives in artificial intelligence and machine learning ( AI/ML ), quantum 
information science ( QIS), and microelectronics, creating valuable synergies. Such 
increased support maximizes the return on scientific investments, fosters innovation, and 
benefits society in domains from medicine to national security.
The impact of the more constrained budget scenario is severe. It forces the US to 
cede leadership in many initiatives to other regions of the world and reduces investments 
in workforce and future technologies to critical levels. Specifically, the G3 dark matter ex-
ploration would be relocated outside the US, and elements of DUNE  would be descoped or 
delayed. This limiting of DUNE ’s physics reach would negatively impact the reputation of 
the US as an international host, and more limited contributions to an offshore Higgs factory 
would tarnish our standing as a partner for future global facilities. Conversely, a modest 
increase in budget over the less constrained scenario allows for additional pathways to 
discovery by accelerating science, leveraging existing investments, and solidifying US 
scientific leadership in the international context. 
We have crafted a well-balanced program that is technically and financially feasible 
for the coming 10 years and builds toward a longer-term vision of US leadership and 
scientific discovery in particle physics. As this program is realized, we look forward to 
sharing new insights into the quantum universe.
 1
 1
Introduction
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel
1: Introduction 2
1.1
Overview and Vision
Curiosity-driven research is at the core of particle physics, a field of science in which 
we study the building blocks of the subatomic world. In examining these point-like par-
ticles and their interactions, we decipher the quantum realm. We also look out into the 
universe, beyond the visible stars, by building instruments that can illuminate the hidden 
universe. By studying the very small and the very large, realms that are beyond the limits 
of normal human perception, we expand our understanding of the world around us and 
begin to grasp our place in the cosmos. Going beyond phenomena that we can probe 
using current experiments, we can use theoretical principles to test our current physics 
understanding and predict new particles and new phenomena; in this way we explore 
new paradigms in physics.
Within each of these broad themes, we identify compelling questions that define 
our priorities and drive what instruments we build and what experiments we design. 
These science drivers change over time, as new discoveries are made and our under-
standing deepens. 
Informed by the community-driven Snowmass planning process, we have identified 
a new set of three science themes and six science drivers. The drivers evolved from 
those in the 2014 P5 report.
Decipher  
the  
Quantum 
Realm
Elucidate the Mysteries  
of Neutrinos
Reveal the Secrets of  
the Higgs BosonExplore  
New  
Paradigms  
in Physics
Search for Direct Evidence 
of New Particles
Pursue Quantum Imprints  
of New PhenomenaIlluminate  
the  
Hidden  
Universe
Determine the Nature  
of Dark Matter
Understand What Drives 
Cosmic Evolution
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel1: Introduction 3
The US particle physics program would not exist without the sustained support of the 
Department of Energy ( DOE) and the National Science Foundation ( NSF). These agencies 
have nurtured a world-class scientific enterprise. From the discovery of the Higgs boson 
and the revelation of the neutrino masses to the stunning realization that the expansion 
of the universe is now accelerating, this effort has revolutionized our understanding of 
how the universe works. With each new insight into the universe, scientific exploration 
encounters escalating challenges. The tools and technologies required to meet those 
challenges become increasingly sophisticated.
Particle physics now operates on a global scale. In isolation, no nation has the 
financial resources, workforce, or technical capacity required to tackle all of the most 
pressing questions of our field. Yet that same scientific program is within the grasp of a 
collaborative global effort. The US is a major player on that stage, currently hosting an 
international program in the study of neutrinos and charged leptons and in dark matter 
physics and cosmology. We are a major partner in offshore high-energy collider facilities 
in Europe and Japan. Each of these initiatives represents a cornerstone in our collective 
effort to push the boundaries of understanding in particle physics.
Since the 2014 P5 report, the US has made significant investments in expanding its 
capabilities for groundbreaking discoveries in accelerators and deep underground lab-
oratories. The High-Luminosity Large Hadron Collider ( HL-LHC) upgrade is proceeding 
successfully with critical US contributions. This project addresses key questions about the 
Higgs boson while searching for new particles and phenomena. Concurrently, the con-
struction of the Deep Underground Neutrino Experiment ( DUNE ) and the Long Baseline 
Neutrino Facility ( LBNF ) is establishing a world-leading experiment for precision neutrino 
studies. This international mega-project on US soil positions the US as a potential host for 
future projects. The commissioning of the world’s largest digital camera for the Legacy 
Survey of Space and Time ( LSST ) is underway, set to be deployed at the nearly com-
pleted Vera C. Rubin Observatory. These projects hold immense potential for producing 
groundbreaking scientific discoveries in the coming decade. 
Mid-scale projects recommended for construction in the previous report, such as the 
Generation 2 dark matter searches, are either nearing completion or producing exciting 
new results. Highlights from the mid-scale program include an early data release from 
the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument ( DESI ) and the short baseline neutrino ( SBN) 
experiments setting stringent limits on the existence of sterile neutrinos. The Muon g-2 
experiment measuring the anomalous magnetic moment of the muon has observed a 
discrepancy between the measured value and the value predicted by the Standard Model 
of particle physics, a result that spurs further theoretical developments.
We envision a new era of scientific leadership, centered on decoding the quantum 
realm, unveiling the hidden universe, and exploring novel paradigms. Balancing current 
and future large- and mid-scale projects with the agility of small projects is crucial to our 
vision. We emphasize the importance of investing in a highly skilled scientific workforce 
and enhancing computational and technological infrastructure. Acknowledging the global 
nature of particle physics, we recognize the importance of international cooperation and 
sustainability in project planning. We seek to open pathways to innovation and discovery 
that offer new insights into the mysteries of the quantum universe.
1: Introduction 4
1.2
The Particle Physics Landscape
Particle physics has been increasingly successful in recent decades in describing matter, 
its interactions, and the 14-billion-year evolution of the universe. Our understanding is 
captured by the Standard Model and the ΛCDM  model, a minimal paradigm of cosmology. 
The development of these paradigms based on detailed experimental investigations and 
deep theoretical principles is a triumph and hallmark for the field. 
We strive to answer the questions these paradigms cannot yet address. Here we 
discuss which existing projects remain central to answering key questions in the current 
scientific landscape as embodied in the 2023  science drivers. We highlight where exper-
imental results demand new initiatives and how theoretical developments of the decade 
influence our path forward. Finally, we note key investments in accelerator technology, 
detector instrumentation, computing, and theory crucial to the long-term future of the field. 
1.2.1   –   Decipher the Quantum Realm
The Standard Model is a remarkable achievement. It provides a comprehensive description 
of all known fundamental particles and their interactions. In that framework, the Higgs 
boson is the key to understanding the origin of particle mass, because particles inter-
acting with the Higgs field acquire mass through the Higgs mechanism. However, not all 
particles behave that way. Neutrinos, the tiniest and most elusive matter particles, once 
assumed to be massless, appear to defy the predictions of the Standard Model. Their 
ability to oscillate between flavors is linked to their mass. Yet the connection between the 
Higgs mechanism and neutrino masses remains a mystery.
Elucidating the mysteries of neutrinos and revealing the secrets of the Higgs boson 
are essential for understanding the complete picture of particle physics. Each of these 
science drivers, with its potential to challenge the Standard Model, can act as a key to 
unlock the quantum realm.
Elucidate the Mysteries of Neutrinos
Neutrino interactions are rare, and their behavior is unique. With technology available 
today we can detect neutrinos from various sources and produce them in large numbers 
by accelerating intense proton beams on a target. We can aim the produced neutrinos 
at detectors from a few kilometers (short-baseline) to more than a thousand kilometers 
(long-baseline) away to observe how their nature oscillates as they travel. 
Experiments in SBN oscillation are more compact in scope, allowing us to pursue 
specific questions and test new technologies. The SBN effort as recommended by the 
2014 P5 is well underway. The design of long-baseline experiments, with detectors placed 
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel1: Introduction 5
both close to and far from the beam, allows them to act as many experiments in one. For 
example, the large volume of a far detector allows it to detect neutrinos from supernovae 
and the sun in parallel with long-baseline measurements. 
We stand on the verge of precision neutrino physics. Recent results from the NOvA  
and T2K neutrino experiments have confirmed the benchmarks future neutrino experiments 
must meet. Following the recommendations of the previous P5, the DUNE  experiment 
is under construction, with LBNF  leveraging the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory 
(Fermilab) proton complex to deliver an intense neutrino beam to the nearly complete 
Sanford Underground Research Facility ( SURF ) in South Dakota. DUNE  will use massive, 
cryogenic liquid-argon ( LAr) time-projection chambers ( LArTPCs ) and the intense beam 
to comprehensively determine the structure of neutrino mixings and the pattern of their 
masses. The realization and operation of the ProtoDUNE  detector prototypes at the CERN  
Neutrino Platform successfully demonstrated the LArTPC  technology for DUNE . This pro-
gram is poised to acquire large neutrino interaction datasets to challenge the validity of 
the neutrino oscillation framework. 
Both short- and long-baseline programs offer opportunities to search for signatures 
of unexpected neutrino interactions. They are complemented by small experiments like 
COHERENT  at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory, which recently announced the discov-
ery of a formerly undetected neutrino interaction mode, coherent elastic neutrino-nucleus 
scattering. A program of neutrino experiments at different scales can ensure that we have 
the tools and understanding of neutrino interactions and production to enable the potential 
for discovery of the large facilities being constructed. 
If a departure from the current neutrino oscillation framework were to be found, 
there would be interest in muon storage rings as a neutrino source offering precise and 
well-characterized neutrino beams. A so-called neutrino factory, whose technology requires 
research and development ( R&D), could propel the neutrino program to new heights of 
precision oscillation studies.
Reveal the Secrets of the Higgs Boson
The Higgs boson, a unique elementary particle devoid of spin, can interact with all known 
matter particles. This particle was discovered at the Large Hadron Collider ( LHC) with 
crucial contributions from the US community, just prior to the last P5 report. The existence 
of the Higgs raises questions about why it is “frozen” in the universe, imbued in a field 
that gives mass to all elementary particles. To understand the pervasive influence of the 
Higgs boson, the interactions of the Higgs field with itself, which determine its potential 
energy, must be thoroughly studied. To date, measurements of the Higgs at the LHC agree 
with the predictions of the Standard Model. The ATLAS  (A Toroidal LHC Apparatus) and 
CMS  (Compact Muon Solenoid) experiments have achieved precise measurements of 
the Higgs boson mass, confirmed its spin as zero, and measured its lifetime. However, 
many questions remain about its nature. 
Machines like the LHC collide high-energy beams of protons to investigate their fun-
damental structure and produce particles of higher mass. The HL-LHC upgrade, starting 
1: Introduction 6
in 2029 , will continue to push the boundaries of our understanding of the Higgs boson by 
increasing the rate of particle collisions to obtain on the order of 400 million Higgs bosons. 
It is possible that the Higgs could decay to entirely novel particle families connected to 
physics beyond the Standard Model. Upgraded detectors and advances in software and 
computing, including artificial intelligence/machine learning ( AI/ML ), will enable the ex-
periments to detect rare events with higher efficiency and greater purity. 
These studies will eventually be limited by the challenges of using proton beams, which 
are composite objects made of quarks and gluons. The next step is to use electron and 
positron beams to construct a Higgs factory, which would allow precision measurements 
of the Higgs boson properties and searches for exotic decays, possibly into dark matter. 
Precision studies of the Higgs self-interaction and searches for possible new spin-
less particles related to the Higgs require much larger energies per fundamental particle 
(parton) interaction than previously considered: on the order of 10 TeV or more. For lepton 
colliders, this is the nominal collision energy in the center-of-momentum ( CM) frame. For 
proton colliders, the parton-parton interaction energy is roughly a tenth of the CM energy. 
We refer henceforth to a 10 TeV parton-center-of-momentum ( pCM) collider, since this 
term applies equally to colliders of all types. Realizing such a collider has impacts beyond 
the Higgs science driver. 
1.2.2   –   Illuminate the Hidden Universe
When we look backward in cosmic time, we see a universe very different from the one 
we know today. The universe has evolved from early moments of rapid expansion (cos-
mic inflation), which left behind the seeds of its future structure, to intermediate periods 
dominated by radiation (potentially including unknown light particle species) and dark 
matter, to our current epoch of accelerated expansion, driven by an unknown component 
we call dark energy. 
The ΛCDM  paradigm captures the physics that governs this evolution, which is outside 
the Standard Model. The two science drivers discussed in this section investigate, and 
potentially challenge, different aspects of this paradigm. 
Determine the Nature of Dark Matter
Our observations of the universe tell us that dark matter exists, but we have yet to deter-
mine its nature. Cosmic surveys, including LSST  and DESI , probe the distribution of dark 
matter on a variety of length scales and yield essential data about its properties. The 
remaining efforts, which use a blend of underground facilities, telescopes, quantum sen-
sors, and accelerator-based probes, focus on detecting particle dark matter candidates. 
Until now, the study of dark matter has focused on a class of theoretically well-  
motivated candidates called weakly interacting massive particles ( WIMP s). Generation- 2 
WIMP  dark matter direct-detection experiments recommended in 2014  are in progress. 
Several are already refining our understanding of dark matter. The next generation of 
direct WIMP  searches will need to be so sensitive that even the elusive neutrinos will 
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel1: Introduction 7
be background noise. Reaching this so-called neutrino fog is a milestone, at which we 
cover a large fraction of WIMP  theories. Navigating through the neutrino fog will require 
innovative thinking and R&D of novel technologies. Testing the full range of WIMP  theories 
could require a collider with at least 10 TeV pCM. 
These endeavors complement efforts to study non- WIMP  dark matter candidates 
such as the quantum chromodynamics ( QCD ) axion and hidden sector particles. Since 
the 2014 P5 report, both theoretical and experimental efforts to study these theoretically 
well-motivated candidates have matured. These candidates can be searched for even 
with small-scale experiments.
A class of heavy WIMP  dark matter candidates would produce astrophysical signals 
that reflect their nature. Searches for these signals are part of a broader multi-messenger 
astrophysics program that maps our universe with light, neutrinos, and gravitational 
waves. Gamma-ray observatories and the neutrino observatory IceCube  have begun to 
place interesting constraints on these candidates, with substantial advances promised 
by the far more sensitive next-generation observatories.
Understand What Drives Cosmic Evolution
Light from the early universe, known as the cosmic microwave background ( CMB ), carries 
the imprint of quantum fluctuations left behind by cosmic inflation. Precision measure-
ments of the polarization of the CMB  have already shaped our understanding of inflation 
and constrained certain neutrino properties. Future surveys, built on well-established 
techniques, aim to study the imprint of gravitational waves from the inflation era on the 
CMB . These observations will also constrain new light particle species that may have 
influenced the universe’s evolution at an early stage. 
Galaxy surveys using both imaging and spectroscopy have generated major advances 
in robust, precise constraints on the accelerated expansion rate of the universe. Current 
data reveal challenges explaining both early- and late-universe observations within the 
ΛCDM  model. More and higher precision data are needed to understand the implications. 
The complementary spectroscopic and imaging surveys DESI  and LSST  will take that next 
step in exploring the limits of the current cosmological paradigm and determining whether 
it needs to be modified. DESI  is already yielding results, while the LSST  is expected to 
begin in 2025 . These experiments will be at their most powerful when combined with each 
other and with current and future CMB  measurements.
Early results from both DESI  and LSST  will shape future priorities. Together with a 
potential DESI  upgrade, they will inform the design of a next-generation spectroscopic 
survey by telling us which potential science goals—inflation, late-time cosmic acceleration, 
light relics, neutrino masses, and dark matter—should be emphasized. LSST  science re-
sults will drive future survey concepts for the Rubin Observatory. A new technique based 
on line intensity mapping ( LIM) could provide a more complete view of the intermediate 
period between the period of inflation and our current era of accelerated cosmic expan-
sion. Further study is needed to establish its feasibility.
1: Introduction 8
1.2.3   –   Explore New Paradigms in Physics
To gain a deeper understanding of the quantum universe, we must map out unexplored 
territory beyond the Standard Model and ΛCDM and understand how these two paradigms 
fit together. Particle accelerators allow us to search for new particles directly and to seek 
quantum imprints of new phenomena currently beyond our direct reach. This theme is 
the evolution of the “Explore the Unknown” science driver from 2014.
Search for Direct Evidence of New Particles
Direct searches for new heavy particles using high-energy accelerators have historically 
been a strong driver of progress in particle physics. A decade of direct searches for new 
particles at the LHC has produced a treasure trove of data and a wealth of innovative anal-
yses that leverage AI/ML  techniques. The discovery of the Higgs boson at the electroweak 
scale was a triumph, but its small mass remains a mystery. Theoretical and experimental 
studies indicate that a comprehensive study of the electroweak scale requires colliders 
with energy of at least 10 TeV pCM, larger than previously assumed. 
There is new interest in searching for relatively light but weakly coupled new par -
ticles, such as dark matter particles from hidden sector models. Weak coupling implies 
their production is rare. In this search, our strategy is not to push for the highest possible 
energy, but for higher-intensity accelerators. Large datasets from a Higgs factory will 
enable direct searches for feebly coupled light states. In the case of hidden sector dark 
matter, accelerator-based searches using existing beam dumps are sensitive to bench-
mark models in the MeV–GeV mass ranges. Intensity upgrades at the proton beamline at 
Fermilab and focused theory efforts may uncover exciting new lines of inquiry.
Pursue Quantum Imprints of New Phenomena
New phenomena at high energies may be probed through their low-energy quantum im-
prints. Quantum imprints can manifest in a diverse range of systems, from the relatively 
light muons and bottom, charm, and strange quarks, to the heaviest known fundamental 
particles, the top quark and the Higgs boson. The pursuit of these subtle effects requires 
large data samples. This in turn requires accelerators producing high-intensity beams 
and precision detectors that can handle the intensity.
The LHCb  and Belle II  experiments use, respectively, a proton accelerator in Europe 
and an electron accelerator in Japan for their precision studies of bottom quark systems. 
Modest upgrades to these experiments will expand their already unprecedented datasets. 
The successful completion of the Muon g-2 experiment has left us with a tantalizing 
hint of new physics. New techniques it developed for producing and transporting muons 
are applicable to other current and future experiments. Another initiative, Mu2e , searches 
for a muon changing to an electron without producing any neutrinos. Detection of this 
charged lepton flavor violation effect would be a revolutionary indication of new physics. 
Mu2e  is nearing completion and poised to begin its first run in 2026 , with data-taking con -
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel1: Introduction 9
tinuing intermittently until the end of the decade. Future experiments of this type depend 
on upgrades to Fermilab’s accelerator complex. R&D would be required to establish the 
feasibility of these upgrades.
In addition to studying the nature of the Higgs boson, a Higgs factory would be a 
highly sensitive probe of quantum imprints of new phenomena. Precision measurements 
of Higgs couplings could yield information about extended Higgs sectors. The large sam-
ples of W and Z bosons produced at a Higgs factory would support exceptionally precise 
studies of electroweak interactions, studies that indirectly probe an energy scale well 
beyond the HL-LHC.
1.2.4   –   Interconnected Opportunities 
The science themes and drivers above provide a useful organizing principle, and they 
are deeply interconnected. For example, studies of cosmic evolution provide critical 
information not only about dark energy and inflation, but also about light relic particles 
in the early universe, dark matter, and the scale of the neutrino masses. Complemen-
tary measurements obtained across science drivers provide a powerful tool for testing 
paradigms. 
It is perhaps not surprising that a common thread across many drivers is the need 
for more powerful accelerators. Future studies of neutrinos and charged lepton flavor 
violation would likely need higher-intensity neutrino, muon, and proton beams. Revealing 
the secrets of the Higgs boson, characterizing WIMP  dark matter, and searching for direct 
evidence of new particles ultimately requires access to the electroweak scale provided 
by a collider with p CM energy of 10 TeV. 
We do not yet have a technology capable of building a 10 TeV pCM energy machine, 
but the case for one is clear. Extensive R&D is required to develop cost-effective options. 
Possibilities include proton beams with high-field magnets, muon beams that require rapid 
capture and acceleration of muons within their short lifetime, and conceivably electron 
and positron beams with wakefield acceleration. All three approaches have the potential 
to revolutionize the field.
A demonstrator facility along the path to a 10 TeV pCM muon collider could fit into the 
evolution of the accelerator complex at Fermilab. Such a demonstrator might produce 
intense muon and neutrino beams in addition to performing critical R&D; it could leverage 
expertise in muon and neutrino beam facilities developed over the past decade. The im-
proved accelerator complex could also support beam-dump and fixed-target experiments 
for direct searches and quantum imprints of new physics. This R&D path therefore aligns 
with five of the six science drivers.
1: Introduction 10
1.3
Enabling Capabilities and  
National Initiatives 
The US has world-renowned capabilities in particle physics. The national laboratories 
operate some of the most powerful and sophisticated particle accelerators and detectors 
in the world and attract some of the brightest minds in science and engineering. Fermilab, 
the only single-purpose laboratory for particle physics in the US, and Argonne ( ANL), 
Brookhaven ( BNL), Lawrence Berkeley ( LBNL ) and SLAC  National Laboratories, with 
their complementary strengths, provide unique infrastructure and technical capabilities 
for innovation and discovery in particle physics. US universities play an important role in 
experimental and theoretical research and in educating the next generation of scientists. 
US national initiatives in quantum science, microelectronics, and AI/ML  as well as 
general accelerator and detector R&D have an outsized impact on the field. They lead 
to new approaches in experiment and theory, and they inspire new experiments and 
detector upgrades. The US program leads in the application of AI/ML  to particle physics, 
and recent advances in computing are beginning to revolutionize detector development, 
data taking, analysis, simulation, and accelerator design. The field continues to make 
substantial contributions to the initiatives on quantum information science and micro-
electronics. The US is also leading theoretical developments in particle physics, which 
has been crucial in providing guidance to experiments, interpreting data, and uncovering 
fundamental theories.
New particle detectors with enhanced sensitivity and accelerators that provide beams 
at higher energies and intensities have been key to the advancement of the field. Particle 
physics is the steward of accelerator R&D, together with our partners in nuclear physics, 
basic energy sciences ( BES), accelerator R&D and production, and applied science. 
In addition, the development of infrastructure supporting scientific research at the 
South Pole and the creation of a deep underground laboratory in the US have opened 
new facilities for discovery science. The South Pole station and surrounding science lab-
oratories are a one-of-a-kind research facility maintained by the US. The unique location 
provides an unparalleled view of the universe and allows for science that is not accessi-
ble elsewhere. The infrastructure and support of the South Pole station and its science 
program are critical for the study of the CMB  and astrophysical neutrinos.
The construction of SURF  in the US enables the precision studies of neutrinos and 
the search for dark matter in an environment shielded by Earth. With SURF , the US has 
created a premier underground laboratory that is built on a decades-old distinguished 
history. The realization of this facility adds unparalleled infrastructure capability to the 
suite of national laboratories in the US. SURF enables the US to be an international host 
for the neutrino and dark matter experiments recommended in this report.
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel1: Introduction 11
1.4
Impact on Society
Pushing the frontiers of human knowledge in particle physics requires global scientific col-
laborations, state-of-the-art research facilities, and infrastructure to support the ambitious 
projects that advance science. In collaborating on and coordinating large international 
efforts, scientists connect irrespective of their backgrounds, making particle physics an 
enterprise that transcends borders, boundaries, cultures, and societies.
Discoveries of new laws of nature that deepen our understanding of the inner work-
ings of the universe not only excite scientists but continue to amaze the public and inspire 
many people to pursue careers in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics—the  
STEM  fields. Nurturing and developing the next generation of scientists and training a 
highly-skilled workforce are important benefits to society. 
Particle physics has a long-proven record of creating new technologies that have 
revolutionized our daily experience, such as the world wide web and life-saving medical 
applications—from cancer treatment to medical imaging—derived from particle accel-
erator and detector technologies. The tools developed for particle physics research also 
impact society through their adoption by other scientific fields. Applications in chemistry 
and materials science, for instance, have led to innovations in drug discovery and the 
design and realization of novel materials.
Particle physics provides a training ground for a skilled workforce that drives not 
only fundamental science, but quantum information science, AI/ML , computational mod-
eling, finance, national security, and microelectronics. The US has led the way in many 
groundbreaking discoveries in particle physics and is poised to continue its leadership 
role with sustained investment.
1.5 
Process and Criteria 
The 2023  P5 is charged with developing a fiscally viable 10-year strategic plan for US 
particle physics. The charge further specified that this 10-year plan should fit in the con-
text of a 20-year vision (see Appendix 1).
The recommended program must reflect the scientific interests of the particle phys-
ics community. The 2021  Snowmass Community Planning Exercise, organized by the 
Division of Particles and Fields of the American Physical Society, provided initial input to 
the deliberations of the P5 panel. To fully capture the views of the community, the panel 
solicited additional input through town hall meetings, laboratory visits, and individual  
1: Introduction 12
communications. The panel was especially encouraged by the active participation of early 
career members in the community-driven planning process. They represent the future 
of our field and are essential to the realization of the goals and aspirations detailed in 
this report.
During the panel’s deliberations, there was consensus that the overall program should 
enable US leadership in core areas of particle physics. The program should leverage 
unique US facilities and capabilities, engage with core national initiatives to develop key 
technologies, and develop a skilled workforce for the future that draws on US talent.  
Effective engagement and leadership in international endeavors were also considerations. 
 The community presented P5 with more inspiring and ambitious projects than fiscal 
reality could accommodate. In selecting projects, the panel considered a project’s indi-
vidual scientific merit and potential for transformational discovery as well as how well the 
project met criteria for the overall program. 
The DOE provided the panel with two budget scenarios for High Energy Physics ( HEP) 
derived from realistic near-term budget projections. The baseline scenario assumes budget 
levels for HEP for fiscal years 2023  through 2027  that are specified in the Creating Helpful 
Incentives to Produce Semiconductors ( CHIPS ) and Science Act of 2022 . The baseline 
budget scenario then increases by 3% per year from fiscal year 2028  through 2033 . The 
less favorable scenario assumes increases of 2% per year from fiscal year 2024  to 2033 . 
The panel was asked to develop DOE  programs consistent with these scenarios. 
Prioritization of projects that would receive funding from the DOE  therefore had to con-
sider both project cost and the uncertainties in that cost related to the project’s technical 
readiness and design maturity. For projects where the US contribution is expected to 
come entirely from NSF, the panel was only asked to consider scientific relevance to the 
US particle physics program. We note that in a number of cases, the NSF science case 
for a jointly funded project extends beyond particle physics into astrophysics. 
The panel categorized projects as small ( <$50M ), medium ( $50M –250M ), and large 
(>$250M ) based on the US contribution to their construction cost. In the large and medi-
um categories, initiatives were first prioritized based on individual scientific merit, then 
assessed on project maturity and technical risk. The balance of project timescales was 
also considered, in order to ensure delivery of scientific results throughout the decade 
and opportunities for scientists at all career levels. The final prioritization holistically 
considered the cost of construction, commissioning, operations, and related research 
support, distributed over a 10- to 20-year period. As per the charge, the panel generally 
did not consider individual small projects, but did note areas where such projects could 
be particularly effective. As part of this process, the panel established budget profiles in 
FY23  dollars with assumptions on inflation as described in section 8. 
To help the P5 panel better understand costs, schedules, and risks of the large 
projects, a subcommittee was convened with project management and technical experts 
from the community. The subcommittee provided an independent assessment of the cost 
range, schedule, and risks of the major projects. That input was used to assess the most 
likely cost scenarios and reduce the chance of unexpected budget overruns from current 
and new projects into the next decade.
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel1: Introduction 13
The panel also considered broader questions of how this program should be carried 
out. We discuss ethical conduct in the field and present recommendations to build a more 
inclusive and respectful community that draws on all talent in the nation and beyond.
P5 worked completely independently from the “Elementary Particle Physics: Prog-
ress and Promise" ( EPP2024 )” panel that will deliver its report later in 2024 , although we 
shared the same inputs from the community. EPP is convened by the National Academy 
of Sciences and charged to deliver a view of elementary particle physics over even longer 
time scales and unconstrained by financial considerations.
1.6
Roadmap to the Report
Section 1 introduces the science drivers and our vision for particle physics as well as 
the process and criteria for the P5 deliberations. 
The recommendations are presented in section 2. Brief discussions expand on 
the infrastructure and expertise required to carry them out as well as the importance 
of international and inter-agency partnerships. The subsequent sections discuss how 
the program can be adapted to alternative budget scenarios, both for less and more 
favorable funding. Sections 3, 4, and 5 describe the impact of these recommendations 
on the three science themes but are not intended to be comprehensive reviews of the 
science opportunities. 
Additional area recommendations are made in section 6, which highlight theoret-
ical, computational, and technological areas where sustained investments can advance 
the future of science and technology. In those recommendations, the panel explicitly 
indicates the increase in annual funding needed to achieve the field’s 20-year goals—
increases that should be achieved through a ramp, lasting no more than five years, 
between current and new funding levels. Section 7 expands on the recommendation 
supporting a technologically advanced workforce. Additional budgetary considerations 
are described in section 8.
 “By studying the very small and  
the very large, realms that are  
beyond the limits of normal human  
perception, we expand our  
understanding of the world around  
us and begin to grasp our place  
in the cosmos.”
 15
 2
The  
Recommended  
Particle Physics 
Program
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel
2: The Recommended Particle Physics Program 16
2 .1
Overview 
A particle physics program that tackles the most important questions in each of the science 
drivers maximizes its potential for groundbreaking scientific discovery. Executing such 
a program requires a balanced portfolio of large, medium, and small projects, coupled 
with substantial investments in forward-looking R&D and the development of a skilled 
workforce for the nation. 
Building upon the foundations laid by the previous P5, our recommended program 
completes ongoing projects and capitalizes on their momentum. A suite of new initiatives 
at a range of scales includes major projects that will shape the scientific landscape over 
the next two decades. The prioritized time sequencing of recommended projects and R&D, 
summarized in Figure 1, reflects our current understanding of the scientific landscape and 
its associated uncertainties. 
The overall program is carefully constructed to be compatible with the baseline budget 
scenario provided by DOE . To achieve that, we recommend continuing specific projects, 
strategically advancing some to the construction phase, and delaying others. As shown 
in Figure 1, in some cases individual phases or elements of large-scale projects had to 
be prioritized separately. The process and criteria by which the recommended initiatives 
were selected are laid out in section 1.5. 
We note our commitment to the ongoing projects described in section 1. The scientific 
direction and balance of the recommended new initiatives are summarized below. 
DUNE  will comprehensively explore the quantum realm of neutrinos, potentially un-
earthing new physics beyond current theoretical frameworks. Early implementation of 
the accelerator upgrade ACE-MIRT  advances the DUNE  program significantly, hastening 
the definite discovery of the neutrino mass ordering. This upgrade in conjunction with the 
deployment of the third far detector and a more capable near detector are indispensable 
components of the re-envisioned next phase of DUNE . R&D for an advanced fourth detector 
enables the expansion of the physics program of LBNF . These substantial initiatives find 
synergy with smaller-scale experiments to elucidate the mysteries of neutrinos.
A Higgs factory is the next step toward fully revealing the secrets of the Higgs boson 
within the quantum realm. We advocate substantial US participation in the design and 
construction of accelerators and detectors for an offshore facility, and we advocate in-
vestment of effort to support development of the Future Circular Collider-electron (e–) 
positron (e+) (FCC-ee) and the International Linear Collider ( ILC), along with a parallel and 
increasingly intensive program of R&D pursuing revolutionary accelerator and detector 
technologies. These are crucial for a leadership role in the design and construction of 
the Higgs factory and for our aspiration to lead and potentially host a next high-energy 
collider facility beyond the Higgs factory.
 There is a compelling physics case for constructing a 10 TeV or more pCM collider. 
Such a collider would search for direct evidence and quantum imprints of new particles 
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel2: The Recommended Particle Physics Program 17
and forces at unprecedented energies. There are several approaches: a 10 TeV muon 
collider, a 100 TeV proton-proton collider such as FCC-hh at CERN , or possibly a 10 TeV 
high-energy e+e– or γ-γ collider based on the wakefield acceleration technology. Any of 
them would enable a comprehensive physics portfolio that includes ultimate measurements 
in the Higgs sector, a broad search program providing access to new hidden sectors by 
producing a substantially higher mediator mass or probing even smaller coupling, and 
opportunities to produce new particles directly. All options for a 10 TeV pCM collider are 
new technologies under development and R&D  is required before we can embark on 
building a new collider. 
Further insights will be gained over this decade through collaboration and planning 
with international partners and dedicated R&D efforts aimed at addressing technical chal-
lenges. A panel in the latter part of the decade will be able to harness this information to 
make further decisions on the path toward future colliders.
A transformative next-generation CMB  experiment, CMB -S4, will plumb the secrets 
of the primordial universe during and immediately after a period of rapid expansion; it 
should reveal signatures of new physics at energies far beyond the reach of colliders. The 
ongoing galaxy survey program, enhanced by the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument 
initiative DESI -II, investigates the cause for a more recent era of accelerated expansion. 
Together, they promise revolutionary insight into the drivers of cosmic evolution. 
In parallel, a strong R&D effort builds toward the ultimate next-generation wide-field 
spectroscopic survey Spec -S5, which will study the possible time evolution of dark energy 
and provide a test of inflation complementary to CMB -S4. Development of the emerging 
technology of line-intensity mapping could create a 3D map of the universe and enable 
theoretically clean and powerful tests of cosmology.  
Another suite of experiments pursues the undetermined nature of the dark matter that 
gravitationally influences our universe. Select dark matter experiments searching for WIMP s 
will reach critical discovery potential for a broad range of WIMP  masses. Smaller-scale 
experiments will survey the wider set of dark matter theories and their parameter space. 
In total, these efforts promise an unprecedented view of the hidden universe. 
A new DOE portfolio of agile projects across all science drivers complements existing 
opportunities within NSF. This portfolio plays a pivotal role in achieving a balanced and 
forward-looking program. 
Realizing the full potential of the experimental landscape requires not just targeted 
R&D, but substantial strategic investments in theory and infrastructure. Just as hints of 
new physics revealed by experiment drive new theoretical developments, theory guides 
experimental inquiries and enriches our understanding of fundamental principles. A co-
ordinated effort that develops shared cyberinfrastructure, harnesses emerging technol-
ogies, and leverages national initiatives such as AI/ML , microelectronics, and quantum 
information science ( QIS) benefits all aspects of our scientific program. Equally crucial, 
key facilities must be maintained and developed in alignment with the long-term vision 
outlined in this report.
An ambitious, effective scientific program thrives when pursued by a vibrant scientific 
community. We therefore endorse strategic initiatives to collectively amplify and strengthen 
the workforce while fostering a healthy working environment. These initiatives are designed 
2: The Recommended Particle Physics Program 18
to uphold ethical conduct of research, dismantle barriers to entry and retention, recruit 
broadly, and pave new pathways of opportunity. This commitment nurtures an advanced 
technological workforce not only adept in particle physics but also equipped to contribute 
to the technological advancements essential for the nation. 
The vision outlined in this report provides opportunities for paradigm-shifting discov-
eries. By deciphering the quantum realm, illuminating the hidden universe, and exploring 
new paradigms in physics, we step further into our quantum universe. Some of the pri-
orities are designed to adapt naturally as this landscape evolves over the next decade, 
while others are designed to drive that evolution.
2.2
Recommendations
To drive US particle physics forward and maintain strong global leadership, we advocate 
for a comprehensive and balanced program that strategically addresses the three science 
themes and their six interwoven drivers. The numerical order of the recommendations 
listed below is not meant to reflect their relative priority; instead it is used to group them 
thematically. The lists under the recommendations are not prioritized, except for the list 
of major projects under Recommendation 2. Each recommendation is stated in boldface, 
followed by concise, lettered explanations of how the recommendation can be realized. 
The impact of alternative budget scenarios on the different elements of the program is 
discussed in section 2.6.
A full list of Recommendations is provided at the end of the report. That list includes 
Area Recommendations (section 6) in addition to those here. 
Recommendation 1: As the highest priority independent of the budget sce-
narios, complete construction projects and support operations of ongoing 
experiments and research to enable maximum science.
We reaffirm the previous P5 recommendations on major initiatives:
a.  HL-LHC (including the ATLAS  and CMS  detectors, as well as the Accelerator Upgrade 
Project) to start addressing why the Higgs boson condensed in the universe ( reveal 
the secrets of the Higgs boson , section 3.2), to search for direct evidence for new 
particles (section 5.1), to pursue quantum imprints of new phenomena (section 5.2), 
and to determine the nature of dark matter (section 4.1).
b.  The first phase of DUNE  and PIP-II to open an era of precision neutrino measurements 
that include the determination of the mass ordering among neutrinos. Knowledge of 
this fundamental property is a crucial input to cosmology and nuclear science ( elu-
cidate the mysteries of neutrinos, section 3.1).
c.  The Vera C. Rubin Observatory to carry out the LSST , and the LSST  Dark Energy 
Science Collaboration, to understand what drives cosmic evolution (section 4.2).
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel2: The Recommended Particle Physics Program 19
In addition, we recommend continued support for the following ongoing experiments at 
the medium scale (project costs > $50M  for DOE and > $4M  for NSF), including completion 
of construction, operations, and research: 
d. NOvA , SBN, T2K, and IceCube  (elucidate the mysteries of neutrinos, section 3.1).
e.  DarkSide -20k, LZ, SuperCDMS , and XENONnT  (determine the nature of dark matter, 
section 4.1).
f. DESI  (understand what drives cosmic evolution, section 4.2).
g. Belle II , LHCb , and Mu2e  (pursue quantum imprints of new phenomena, section 5.2).
The agencies should work closely with each major project to carefully manage the costs 
and schedule to ensure that the US program has a broad and balanced portfolio.
Recommendation 2: Construct a portfolio of major projects that collectively 
study nearly all fundamental constituents of our universe and their interactions, 
as well as how those interactions determine both the cosmic past and future. 
These projects have the potential to transcend and transform our current paradigms. They 
inspire collaboration and international cooperation in advancing the frontiers of human 
knowledge. Plan and start the following major initiatives in order of priority from highest 
to lowest:
a.  CMB -S4, which looks back at the earliest moments of the universe to probe physics 
at the highest energy scales. It is critical to install telescopes at and observe from 
both the South Pole and Chile sites to achieve the science goals (section 4.2).
b.  A re-envisioned second phase of DUNE with an early implementation of an enhanced 
2.1 MW beam— ACE-MIRT —a third far detector, and an upgraded near-detector 
complex as the definitive long-baseline neutrino oscillation experiment of its kind 
(section 3.1).
c.  An offshore Higgs factory, realized in collaboration with international partners, in 
order to reveal the secrets of the Higgs boson. The current designs of FCC-ee  and 
ILC meet our scientific requirements. The US should actively engage in feasibility 
and design studies. Once a specific project is deemed feasible and well-defined (see 
also Recommendation 6), the US should aim for a contribution at funding levels com-
mensurate to that of the US involvement in the LHC and HL-LHC, while maintaining 
a healthy US onshore program in particle physics (section 3.2).
d.  An ultimate Generation 3 (G3) dark matter direct detection experiment reaching the 
neutrino fog, in coordination with international partners and preferably sited in the 
US (section 4.1).
e.  IceCube Gen-2, for study of neutrino properties complementary to DUNE and for indirect 
detection of dark matter covering higher mass ranges, using non-beam neutrinos as a 
tool. (section 4.1).
2: The Recommended Particle Physics Program 20
The prioritization principles behind these recommendations can be found in sections 1.6 
and 8.1.
IceCube-Gen2  also has a strong science case in multi-messenger astrophysics 
together with gravitational wave observatories. We recommend that NSF expand its  
efforts in multi-messenger astrophysics, a unique program in the NSF Division of Phys-
ics, with US involvement in the Cherenkov Telescope Array ( CTA; recommendation 3c), 
a next-generation gravitational wave observatory, and IceCube-Gen2 . 
Recommendation 3: Create an improved balance between small-, medium-, 
and large-scale projects to open new scientific opportunities and maximize 
their results, enhance workforce development, promote creativity, and com-
pete on the world stage.
To achieve this balance across all project sizes we recommend the following:
a.  Implement a new small-project portfolio at DOE, Advancing Science and Technology 
through Agile Experiments ( ASTAE ), across science themes in particle physics with 
a competitive program and recurring funding opportunity announcements. This pro-
gram should start with the construction of experiments from the Dark Matter New 
Initiatives ( DMNI ) by DOE -HEP (section 6.2).
b.  Continue Mid-Scale Research Infrastructure ( MSRI ) and Major Research Instru-
mentation ( MRI) programs as a critical component of the NSF research and project 
portfolio.
c.  Support DESI -II for cosmic evolution, LHCb  upgrade II and Belle II  upgrade for quan-
tum imprints, and US contributions to the global CTA Observatory for dark matter 
(sections 4.2, 5.2, and 4.1).
The Belle II  recommendation includes contributions towards the SuperKEKB  accelerator. 
Recommendation 4: Invest in a comprehensive initiative to develop the resourc -
es—theoretical, computational, and technological—essential to realizing our 
20-year strategic vision. This includes an aggressive R&D program that, while 
technologically challenging, could yield revolutionary accelerator designs that 
chart a realistic path to a 10 TeV pCM collider.
Fulfilling this vision requires a substantial investment vital to the effective implementa-
tion and success of the particle physics program. The initiative requires the following 
enhancements to current investments:
a.  Support vigorous R&D toward a cost-effective 10 TeV pCM collider based on proton, 
muon, or possible wakefield technologies, including an evaluation of options for 
US siting of such a machine, with a goal of being ready to build major test facili-
ties and demonstrator facilities within the next 10 years (sections 3.2, 5.1, 6.5, and 
Recommendation 6).
b.  Enhance research in theory to propel innovation, maximize scientific impact of invest-
ments in experiments, and expand our understanding of the universe (section 6.1).
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel2: The Recommended Particle Physics Program 21
c.  Expand the General Accelerator R&D (GARD ) program within HEP, including stew-
ardship (section 6.4).
d. Invest in R&D in instrumentation to develop innovative scientific tools (section 6.3). 
e.  Conduct R&D efforts to define and enable new projects in the next decade, including 
detectors for an e+e– Higgs factory and 10 TeV pCM collider, Spec-S5 , DUNE FD4 , 
Mu2e-II , Advanced Muon Facility, and line intensity mapping (sections 3.1, 3.2, 4.2, 
5.1, 5.2, and 6.3).
f.  Support key cyberinfrastructure components such as shared software tools and a 
sustained R&D effort in computing, to fully exploit emerging technologies for projects. 
Prioritize computing and novel data analysis techniques for maximizing science across 
the entire field (section 6.7).
g.  Develop plans for improving the Fermilab accelerator complex that are consistent 
with the long-term vision of this report, including neutrinos, flavor, and a 10 TeV pCM 
collider (section 6.6).
We recommend specific budget levels for enhanced support of these efforts and their 
justifications as Area Recommendations in section 6.
Recommendation 5: Invest in initiatives aimed at developing the workforce, 
broadening engagement, and supporting ethical conduct in the field. This com-
mitment nurtures an advanced technological workforce not only for particle 
physics, but for the nation as a whole.
The following workforce initiatives are detailed in section 7:
a.  All projects, workshops, conferences, and collaborations must incorporate ethics 
agreements that detail expectations for professional conduct and establish mecha-
nisms for transparent reporting, response, and training. These mechanisms should 
be supported by laboratory and funding agency infrastructure. The efficacy and 
coverage of this infrastructure should be reviewed by a HEPAP  subpanel.
b.  Funding agencies should continue to support programs that broaden engagement 
in particle physics, including strategic academic partnership programs, traineeship 
programs, and programs in support of dependent care and accessibility. A systematic 
review of these programs should be used to identify and remove barriers. 
c.  Comprehensive work-climate studies should be conducted with the support of fund-
ing agencies. Large collaborations and national laboratories should consistently 
undertake such studies so that issues can be identified, addressed, and monitored. 
Professional associations should spearhead field-wide work-climate investigations to 
ensure that the unique experiences of individuals engaged in smaller collaborations 
and university settings are effectively captured.
d.  Funding agencies should strategically increase support for research scientists,  
research hardware and software engineers, technicians, and other professionals  
at universities.
2: The Recommended Particle Physics Program 22
e.  A plan for dissemination of scientific results to the public should be included in the 
proposed operations and research budgets of experiments. 
The funding agencies should include funding for the dissemination of results to the public 
in operation and research budgets. 
Recommendation 6: Convene a targeted panel with broad membership across par-
ticle physics later this decade that makes decisions on the US accelerator-based 
program at the time when major decisions concerning an offshore Higgs factory 
are expected, and/or significant adjustments within the accelerator-based R&D 
portfolio are likely to be needed. A plan for the Fermilab accelerator complex 
consistent with the long-term vision in this report should also be reviewed. 
The panel would consider the following: 
a.  The level and nature of US contribution in a specific Higgs factory including an evalu-
ation of the associated schedule, budget, and risks once crucial information becomes 
available.
b.  Mid- and large-scale test and demonstrator facilities in the accelerator and collider 
R&D portfolios.
c.  A plan for the evolution of the Fermilab accelerator complex consistent with the long-
term vision in this report, which may commence construction in the event of a more 
favorable budget situation.
2.3 
The Path to 10 T eV pCM
Realization of a future collider will require resources at a global scale and will be built 
through a world-wide collaborative effort where decisions will be taken collectively from 
the outset by the partners. This differs from current and past international projects in 
particle physics, where individual laboratories started projects that were later joined by 
other laboratories. The proposed program aligns with the long-term ambition of hosting 
a major international collider facility in the US, leading the global effort to understand the 
fundamental nature of the universe.
There are multiple complementary technologies that could potentially reach the 10 
TeV pCM scale, and the work to determine how to economically reach that goal must go 
forward. This is why we recommend pursuing revolutionary R&D in areas such as high-
field magnets, a multi-megawatt proton driver, wakefield accelerator technology, and muon 
cooling (Recommendation 4a). 
In particular, a muon collider presents an attractive option both for technological 
innovation and for bringing energy frontier colliders back to the US. The footprint of a 
10 TeV pCM  muon collider is almost exactly the size of the Fermilab campus. A muon  
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel2: The Recommended Particle Physics Program 23
collider would rely on a powerful multi-megawatt proton driver delivering very intense and 
short beam pulses to a target, resulting in the production of pions, which in turn decay 
into muons. This cloud of muons needs to be captured and cooled before the bulk of the 
muons have decayed. Once cooled into a beam, fast acceleration is required to further 
suppress decay losses.
Each of these steps presents considerable technical challenges, many of which 
have never been confronted before. This P5 plan outlines an aggressive R&D program to 
determine the parameters for a muon collider test facility by the end of the decade. This 
facility would test the feasibility of developing a muon collider in the following decade.
With a 10 TeV pCM muon collider at Fermilab as the long-term vision, a clear path 
for the evolution of the current proton accelerator complex at Fermilab emerges natu -
rally: a booster replacement with a suitable accumulator/buncher ring would pave the 
way to a muon collider demonstration facility (Recommendation 4g, 6). The upgraded 
facility would also generate bright, well-characterized neutrino beams bringing natural 
synergies with studies of neutrinos beyond DUNE . It would also support beam dump 
and fixed target experiments for direct searches of new physics. Another synergy is 
in charged lepton flavor violation. The current round of searches at Mu2e  can reveal 
quantum imprints of new physics at the 100 TeV energy scale, beyond the reach of 
direct searches at collider facilities in the foreseeable future. An intense muon facility 
may push this search even further.  
Although we do not know if a muon collider is ultimately feasible, the road toward it 
leads from current Fermilab strengths and capabilities to a series of proton beam improve -
ments and neutrino beam facilities, each producing world-class science while performing 
critical R&D toward a muon collider. At the end of the path is an unparalleled global facility 
on US soil. This is our Muon Shot.
2.4
Stewardship of Key Infrastructure 
and Expertise
Successful completion of the recommended major projects depends on critical US infra-
structure (section 6.6), including particular research sites and facilities. DOE National Lab-
oratories are critical research infrastructure that must be maintained and enhanced based 
on the needs of the particle physics community. This is particularly true for Fermilab as 
the only dedicated US laboratory for particle physics. The South Pole, a unique site that 
enables the world-leading science of CMB -S4 and IceCube-Gen2 , must be maintained as 
a premier site of science to allow continued US leadership in these areas. SURF , a deep 
underground research laboratory supported by the South Dakota Science and Technol-
ogy Authority, private foundation funds, and DOE , is a critical addition to the suite of US 
research infrastructure, providing new space and essential infrastructure for DUNE  and 
potentially a G3 dark matter experiment. 
2: The Recommended Particle Physics Program 24
In other cases, the infrastructure is technological and intellectual. The GARD  program 
is critical in supporting a broad range of accelerator science and technology ( AS&T ) for 
DOE ’s Office of Science, separate from the targeted R&D toward future colliders. Along 
with NSF-funded fundamental accelerator science, GARD  supports a broad workforce 
of essential accelerator expertise. The program also provides stewardship of AS&T  for 
DOE ’s Office of Science. This program and the balance across the different research 
thrusts should be reviewed regularly to ensure alignment with the goals in particle physics. 
Reviews should be conducted by broad teams, not only specialists. 
2.5 
International and Inter-Agency  
Partnerships
Major facilities like Fermilab in the US, CERN  in Europe, and KEK in Japan have led the 
worldwide effort to advance accelerator-based studies of particle physics. These facilities 
have enabled many groundbreaking experiments, and their continued leadership roles 
as host laboratories for future accelerators, cutting-edge experiments, and hubs for in-
ternational collaborations are important for progress in the field. 
Successful completion of the recommended major projects depends on significant 
coordination and collaboration among US agencies and international partners. Large 
international projects such as a Higgs factory and DUNE  require not only DOE  and NSF, 
but also the US Department of State and other entities in the federal government to work 
with global partners to establish the complex frameworks involved. 
In the case of the Higgs factory, crucial decisions must be made in consultation with 
potential international partners. The FCC-ee  feasibility study is expected to be completed 
by 2025  and will be followed by a European Strategy Group update and a CERN  coun-
cil decision on the 2028  timescale. The ILC design is technically ready and awaiting a 
formulation as a global project. A dedicated panel should review the plan for a specific 
Higgs factory once it is deemed feasible and well-defined; evaluate the schedule, budget 
and risks of US participation; and give recommendations to the US funding agencies 
later this decade (Recommendation 6). When a clear choice for a specific Higgs factory 
emerges, US efforts will focus on that project, and R&D related to other Higgs factory 
projects would ramp down.
Parallel to the R&D for a Higgs factory, the US R&D effort should develop a 10 TeV 
pCM collider, such as a muon collider, a proton collider, or possibly an electron-positron 
collider based on wakefield technology. The US should participate in the International 
Muon Collider Collaboration ( IMCC ) and take a leading role in defining a reference design. 
We note that there are many synergies between muon and proton colliders, especially in 
the area of development of high-field magnets. R&D efforts in the next 5-year timescale 
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel2: The Recommended Particle Physics Program 25
will define the scope of test facilities for later in the decade, paving the way for initiating 
demonstrator facilities within a 10-year timescale (Recommendation 6). 
For studies of cosmic evolution and astrophysical studies of dark matter, inter-agency 
coordination and cooperation between DOE , NSF, and NASA  using complementary ob-
servational approaches has been very productive in building a world-leading scientific 
program. Such coordination and cooperation should continue.
The field of particle physics is not an isolated endeavor, and it benefits from and con-
tributes to neighboring areas in nuclear physics, astrophysics and astronomy, condensed 
matter physics, precision physics, computing, instrumentation, material science, fusion, 
and others. At the same time, it provides important theoretical and technological input 
to these areas, as well as medical, security, and many other fields, some as seemingly 
unrelated as archaeology. Funding agencies are urged to reach across the traditional 
boundaries to enhance collaboration, maximize science, and develop a strong workforce 
for the nation overall.
2.6 
Adapting to Alternative  
Budget Scenarios
The program recommendations are built considering the baseline budget scenario for 
DOE. This scenario assumes budget levels for HEP for fiscal years 2023  through 2027  that 
are specified in the CHIPS  and Science Act of 2022 . The baseline budget scenario then 
increases by 3% per year from fiscal year 2028  through 2033 . We assume 3% inflation 
throughout our exercise, so it provides an initial increase over five years followed by an 
essentially flat budget in later years. In this scenario, hard choices were required as de-
scribed in section 8.2. The recommended program is well-balanced and forward-looking, 
enabling scientific breakthroughs and maintaining scientific and technological leadership. 
Two other scenarios were considered by the panel. Figure 2 summarizes the projects 
recommended under all three scenarios. 
2.6.1   –   Less Favorable Budget Scenario
We are charged to discuss a less favorable budget scenario that forces us to make more 
drastic and challenging choices. This scenario assumes budget increases of 2% per year 
during fiscal years 2024  to 2033  for DOE  HEP, which is an erosion against an assumed 
3% annual inflation rate. Under this scenario, some interesting scientific opportunities are 
still achievable, but scientific progress is significantly slowed.
In this scenario, we would aim for a program that covers most areas of particle phys -
ics for the next 10 years, maintaining continuity and exploiting the ongoing projects in 
2: The Recommended Particle Physics Program 26
Recommendation 1 as our highest priority. The agencies should launch the same major 
initiatives as outlined in Recommendation 2, some of them with significantly reduced scope:
a. CMB -S4 without reduction in scope.
b.  DUNE  Third Far Detector ( FD3), but defer ACE-MIRT  and the More Capable Near 
Detector ( MCND ). Infrastructure required to accommodate international contributions 
remains a priority.
c. Contribution to an offshore Higgs factory delayed and at a reduced level.
d.  Reduced participation in a G3 dark matter experiment sited outside the US, and no 
SURF  expansion.
e. IceCube -Gen2  without reduction in scope.
The rationale for this prioritization is given in section 8.3. Recommendations 3 and 4 are 
crucial for maintaining the health and balance of the field. While these recommendations 
still apply, they receive reduced support in scenarios between the baseline and less 
favorable conditions. Reductions to all items in these two recommendations should be 
proportionate. Research must be supported at least at the current level. Recommendation 
5 is deemed a high priority and is supported in all scenarios. Recommendation 6 applies 
in all scenarios. 
This less favorable scenario will lead to a loss of US leadership in many areas, es-
pecially the science of the G3 dark matter experiment, and will damage our reputation as 
a reliable international host for DUNE  and as a partner for a Higgs factory. We still make 
enhanced investments in the future, but at a significantly reduced level for small-scale 
experiments, including ASTAE , theory, computing, instrumentation, and collider R&D.  
In this scenario, it would be increasingly difficult to maintain US competitiveness as an 
international partner in accelerator technology. See section 8.3 for more details. 
2.6.2   –   More Favorable Budget Scenario
 
In a budget outlook more favorable than the baseline budget scenario, we urge the fund-
ing agencies to support additional scientific opportunities. Even a small increase in the 
overall budget enables a large return on the investment, serving as a catalyst to acceler-
ate scientific discovery and to unlock new pathways of inquiry. The opportunities include 
R&D, small projects, and the construction of advanced detectors for flagship projects in 
the US. They are listed below in four categories from small to large in budget size:
a. R&D
 i.  Increase investment in detector R&D targeted toward future collider concepts 
for a Higgs factory and 10 TeV pCM collider in order to accelerate US leadership 
in this area.
 ii.  Pursue an expanded DOE  AS&T  initiative to develop foundational technologies 
for particle physics that can benefit applications across science, medicine,  
security, and industry. 
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel2: The Recommended Particle Physics Program 27
 iii.  Pursue broad accelerator science and technology development at both DOE and 
NSF, including partnerships modeled on the plasma science partnership.
b. Small Projects
    Expand the portfolio of agile experiments to pursue new science, enable discov-
ery across the portfolio of particle physics, and provide significant training and 
leadership opportunities for early career scientists.
c. Medium Projects
 i.  Initiate construction of Spec-S5  as the world-leading study of cosmic evolution, 
with applications to neutrinos and dark matter, once its design matures.
 ii.  Initiate construction of an advanced fourth far detector ( FD4) for DUNE  that will 
expand its neutrino oscillation physics and broaden its science program.
 iii.  Initiate construction of a second G3 dark matter experiment to maximize discovery 
potential when combined with the first one.
d. Large Projects
   Evolve the infrastructure of the Fermilab accelerator complex to support a future 
10 TeV pCM collider as a global facility. A positive review of the design by a tar -
geted panel may expedite its execution (Recommendation 6).
2: The Recommended Particle Physics Program 28



== FIGURE 1 SUMMARY ==

Program and Timeline in Baseline Scenario
Timeline overview (2024–2034) of major particle physics projects, categorized clearly into three groups:

Operations (active experiments),

Construction (planned and approved),

R&D (research and development phase only).

- Operations (Active/Ongoing Experiments):
(Experiments already operational or with continuous operation through 2024–2034)

LHC

LZ, XENONnT

NOvA/T2K

SBN

DESI / DESI-II

Belle II

IceCube

SuperCDMS

Rubin / LSST & DESC

Mu2e

DarkSide-20k

- Construction (Major Projects and their expected operation start):
HL-LHC (High Luminosity LHC): Operations starting ~2029

DUNE Phase I: Operations starting ~2031

CMB-S4: Operations starting ~2032

CTA (Cherenkov Telescope Array): Operations starting ~2029

G3 Dark Matter (First Experiment): Construction ~2028, Operations ~2033

IceCube-Gen2: Operations starting ~2034

DUNE FD3: Operations starting ~2033

DUNE MCND (Near Detector complex): Operations starting ~2033

Higgs Factory: Construction ~2034

Mu2e-II: R&D with a decision on future construction

G3 Dark Matter (Second Experiment): R&D with a decision on future construction

DUNE FD4: R&D with a decision on future construction

Spec-S5: R&D with a decision on future construction

Multi-TeV Collider: R&D with a decision on future construction

Line Intensity Mapping (LIM): R&D with a decision on future construction

- Science Drivers (Motivations for Projects):
Each project aligns with specific "science drivers," categorized as Primary (P) or Secondary (S):

Neutrinos

Higgs Boson

Dark Matter

Cosmic Evolution

Direct Evidence of New Particles

Quantum Imprints of New Phenomena

Astronomy & Astrophysics


- Science Enablers (Supporting R&D initiatives):
These initiatives are foundational R&D and support programs that underpin and enable particle physics research but are not full experiments themselves:

Theory, Instrumentation, Computing
(Foundational research and development efforts supporting theory, instrument technology, and computing infrastructure.)

Advancing Science and Technology through Agile Experiments (ASTAE)
(Small-scale, flexible experiments to explore new ideas quickly.)

Test Facilities
(Facilities dedicated to testing new technologies and experimental methods.)

Demonstrators
(Prototype experiments designed to validate new technology or methodologies before full-scale deployment.)

General Accelerator R&D (GARD)
(Research dedicated to developing next-generation accelerator technologies.)

Important Notes:
The timelines indicate clearly when experiments transition from construction to operation.

R&D-only experiments indicate initiatives in research stages without firm construction schedules.

== END OF FIGURE 1 SUMMARY ==

== FIGURE 2 SUMMARY ==

Construction Recommendations Across Various Budget Scenarios

Below are the recommended statuses (Y = Yes, N = No, R&D, C = Conditional, Delayed) for each project under three budget scenarios: Less, Baseline, and More.

Project Recommendations:

Onshore Higgs factory:

Less: N | Baseline: Delayed | More: Y

Offshore Higgs factory (Recommend infrastructure support for international contributions):

Less: Y† | Baseline: Y† | More: Y†

ACE-BR:

Less: C | Baseline: R&D | More: Y

CMB-S4:

Less: Y | Baseline: Y | More: Y

Spec-S5:

Less: R&D | Baseline: R&D | More: Y

IceCube-Gen2:

Less: R&D | Baseline: R&D | More: C

G3 Dark Matter (first experiment) (Can be considered as ASTAE project with reduced scope):

Less: N | Baseline: N# | More: Y

DUNE FD3:

Less: N# | Baseline: Y | More: Y

Test Facilities & Demonstrators:

Less: Y | Baseline: Y | More: Y

ACE-MIRT:

Less: Y | Baseline: Y | More: Y

DUNE FD4:

Less: R&D | Baseline: R&D | More: R&D

G3 Dark Matter (second experiment) (Can be considered as ASTAE project with reduced scope):

Less: N | Baseline: N# | More: Y

Mu2e-II:

Less: N# | Baseline: Y | More: Y

srEDM:

Less: Y | Baseline: Y | More: Y

SURF Expansion:

Less: Y | Baseline: Y | More: Y

DUNE MCND:

Less: N | Baseline: N | More: Y

MATHUSLA:

Less: N | Baseline: N | More: N

FPF Trio:

Less: N | Baseline: N | More: N

Notes:

† Infrastructure support recommended for international contributions.

# Project could be considered as ASTAE (smaller-scale experiments) with reduced scope.

Budget Brackets Legend: (Indicative project size based on estimated US construction cost)

<$60M: Small-scale experiments, typically involving focused studies.

$60M–$100M: Moderate-scale experiments.

$100M–$400M: Medium-to-large-scale experiments requiring significant infrastructure.

$400M–$1000M: Large-scale experiments involving major facilities or detectors.

$1B–$3B: Very large experiments, usually international collaborations or large facilities.

>$3B: Largest-scale international experiments involving extensive infrastructure and global collaboration.


== END OF FIGURE 2 SUMMARY ==

Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel
Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle Physics3: Decipher the Quantum Realm 32
Atoms are the building blocks of matter, but what are the building 
blocks of atoms? For more than a century, we have known that each 
atom is composed of electrons surrounding a heavy nucleus, bound 
together by the electromagnetic force. The nucleus is composed of 
protons and neutrons, which are themselves composed of quarks, 
bound together by the strong force. The building blocks of atoms 
are particles, and the forces that bind the building blocks are also 
described by particles. All known subatomic phenomena can be de -
scribed by particles and their interactions, an amazing new concept 
in modern science. 
When we look deeper, we see a rich landscape of quantum effects that rule the subatom-
ic realm. The electron appears indivisible, yet its properties are affected by a quantum 
dance among all subatomic particles. The heaviest known subatomic particle is the top 
quark, which is surprisingly as massive as a gold atom. While the massless photons and 
gluons mediate the electromagnetic and strong force respectively, the mediators of the 
weak force, the W and Z bosons, are massive, blurring the distinction between “force” and 
“matter.” The Higgs boson, the particle associated with the Higgs field that permeates the 
universe, gives mass to other particles. The Standard Model provides a unified, elegant 
picture of the subatomic realm that has withstood the most rigorous tests at LHC and KEK. 
Beautiful as this picture is, it does not yet account for the masses of the mysterious and 
mutable neutrinos, which oscillate into one another as they travel through the universe. 
Is the Standard Model the ultimate description of the quantum realm? Certainly not, 
and that fact motivates the two science drivers under this theme for the next decade:
 Elucidate the Mysteries of Neutrinos. Neutrinos come in three types, or “flavors,” which 
undergo quantum oscillations. Although the Standard Model can be augmented to accom-
modate neutrino mass and oscillations, we do not know in which specific way to extend 
the model. Moreover, different extensions make vastly different predictions about the birth 
of the universe. We must further investigate the mysteries of neutrinos in order to explore 
the deep connections between their physics and the Standard Model.
 Reveal the Secrets of the Higgs Boson. The discovery of the Higgs boson in 2012 was a 
major victory for the Standard Model. Subsequent investigations have revealed that the 
metastable vacuum in the Standard Model puts the universe on a knife-edge of cosmic 
collapse. Determining the ultimate fate of the universe and looking for physics beyond 
the Standard Model motivates further scrutiny of the Higgs sector.
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel
3: Decipher the Quantum Realm 33
3.1
Elucidate the Mysteries  
of Neutrinos  
3.1.1   –   Science Overview
Neutrinos are the second most abundant of the known particles in the universe and 
yet remain an enigma within the framework of the Standard Model. The observation of 
neutrino oscillations, and the consequent realization that neutrinos have mass, is one of 
the revolutionary discoveries of recent decades. Despite being the lightest of particles, 
the tiny mass of neutrinos challenges the standard paradigm of particle physics and has 
opened a compelling new domain of exploration in the quantum realm.
Nature produces—and we observe—neutrinos in three flavors: electron, muon, and 
tau. We understand each of these neutrino flavors to be a chimera, a mixture of states 
with different masses. According to quantum mechanics such a mixture will evolve, or 
oscillate, into another flavor as it travels. Neutrino oscillation processes have been exten-
sively observed, and the admixture, or mass mixing, of neutrino mass states assigned to 
each flavor and the differences between the neutrino masses have been measured. Yet 
the actual values of the neutrino masses remain unknown, and we are not yet sure how 
they are acquired. Various theoretical frameworks propose diverse methods for neutrino 
Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle Physics3: Decipher the Quantum Realm 34
mass generation, often introducing novel particles and interactions. Certain theories even 
require that neutrinos must be their own antiparticles, which will naturally but surprisingly 
lead to lepton number violation and provide a necessary condition for the matter-dominant 
universe we observe now.
Likewise, we have not definitively measured the ordering of the neutrino masses; 
for example, is the neutrino mass state that has the smallest overlap with the electron 
neutrino the heaviest or the lightest? We refer to the case where the lightest neutrino has 
the largest overlap with the electron neutrino as “normal” ordering, because the mass 
spectrum of the neutrinos in this case follows the familiar mass spectrum of the quarks 
and charged leptons.
The opposite, or inverted, ordering would be a consequential surprise. For instance, 
a new symmetry would likely be needed to account for why the two heavier neutrinos 
are so similar in mass. Neutrino mass ordering impacts efforts that seek to measure the 
neutrino masses and to understand how neutrinos acquire mass in the first place.
Precision studies of neutrino oscillations can resolve important questions beyond 
neutrino mass ordering. Is the lightest (or heaviest) neutrino state an equal combination 
of muon and tau neutrinos, which would hint at new symmetries? Is three-flavor mixing 
a complete description of all neutrino flavor transitions? Do antineutrinos oscillate differ-
ently than neutrinos—namely, is the charge-parity inversion ( CP) symmetry violated, and 
could this difference relate to the origins of matter-antimatter asymmetry in the universe? 
We do not fully understand why some fundamental forces respect the CP symme-
try, while others violate it. For example, we have long had experimental evidence that 
interactions involving the weak force do not conserve CP. Conversely, our description of 
interactions involving the strong force could provide a mechanism for CP violation, yet 
all measurements so far are consistent with the relevant parameter being zero. Theories 
that describe particular patterns of CP violation and conservation can be connected to 
such questions as the nature of dark matter, or why a universe born with equal amounts 
of matter and antimatter developed into the overwhelmingly matter-dominated universe 
we observe today. It therefore makes sense to search for and measure CP violation in 
every context that we can. 
Neutrinos have also opened a new view of astrophysical phenomena that can pro-
vide unique probes of neutrino physics. The neutrino signal from the core collapse of a 
massive star in the Milky Way galaxy provides a window into neutrino flavor transitions 
and transport in a turbulent environment with high neutrino density. Such an environment 
cannot be simulated on Earth. 
Answering the outstanding questions in neutrino physics requires a blend of novel 
technologies and measurements made with exquisite precision. These may serve as bea-
cons, illuminating the path toward unveiling novel interactions, particles, or symmetries 
in the universe. 
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel3: Decipher the Quantum Realm 35
3.1.2   –    Ongoing Projects: NOvA, T2K, SBN, DUNE Phase I, 
PIP-II, and IceCube
 
Ongoing accelerator-based experiments NOvA  and T2K have pioneered electron neutrino 
and antineutrino appearance observations. They have introduced approaches to control 
systematic uncertainties in combined measurements of mass ordering and CP violation 
and other mass mixing parameters. A joint T2K and NOvA  analysis of the two datasets is 
ongoing, and results obtained with the complete datasets may provide early indication of 
future discovery. Ongoing experiments also conduct interesting searches for phenomena 
beyond the Standard Model. 
Over the past decades neutrino oscillation searches at length/distance scales of 1 
MeV/m  have found some anomalous results: The liquid scintillator neutrino detector ( LSND ) 
anomaly, the reactor antineutrino anomaly, the MiniBooNE  low-energy excess, and the 
gallium anomaly. These anomalies have not been confirmed, and the reactor antineutrino 
anomaly has been recently resolved. The remaining phase space will be conclusively 
tested by the current short-baseline neutrino program at Fermilab. The SBN program 
is also crucial in maturing the LAr technology and analysis. SBN, T2K, NOvA , and other 
ongoing experiments also make measurements of neutrino interactions, which underpin 
our understanding of neutrino oscillation mixing (Recommendation 1c). 
The DUNE  experiment consists of three elements: a far detector complex at SURF , 
a near detector complex hosted at Fermilab, and a neutrino beam sent across the 1300 
km distance between the two facilities. The program has achieved significant design and 
construction milestones, successfully scaling LArTPC  technology and preparing the largest 
underground laboratory in the US, scheduled for completion by 2025 . 
For the first phase of DUNE , the far detector complex will comprise two 10 kt LArTPC s 
in an underground area designed to accommodate up to four modules. In this phase these 
detectors and a near detector facility will be illuminated by the world’s brightest neutrino 
beam, generated by the LBNF  at Fermilab. The PIP-II accelerator upgrade currently under 
construction is central in enabling at least 1.2 MW proton beam operation during Phase 
I (Recommendation 1b).
DUNE ’s comprehensive program of neutrino oscillation measurements sets the 
mass-ordering question as its first goal. Thanks to DUNE ’s long baseline and broad en -
ergy range of neutrinos that result in a strong separation between normal and inverted 
mass ordering scenarios, DUNE  Phase I is expected to achieve a definitive measurement 
of the mass ordering within its first decade of operation. This result, when combined 
with measurements made over shorter distances by experiments such as JUNO , probes 
nonstandard couplings to matter. Together with Hyper-Kamiokande and other ongoing 
experiments, these measurements may clarify the nature of mixing or uncover where the 
three-flavor mixing model is incomplete. 
DUNE ’s large, underground LAr detectors also have a unique sensitivity to the elec-
tron neutrino component of a supernova neutrino burst. They will therefore complement 
measurements by other underground neutrino detectors, such as Hyper-Kamiokande, 
and measurements by the Antarctic neutrino observatory IceCube  and future direct dark 
Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle Physics3: Decipher the Quantum Realm 36
matter detectors that constrain the overall burst energetics. In addition, IceCube  has been 
able to make measurements of atmospheric neutrino oscillations, and demonstrated that 
neutrinos are new tools for astrophysics enabling us to peer into the area of supermassive 
black holes and the disk of our own Milky Way. 
 Strong software and computing development that includes AI/ML  dedicated effort has 
been integral to the success of the ongoing and planned neutrino experiments. Therefore, 
it is essential that advances in software, computing, and AI/ML  keep up with demands of 
new neutrino projects, large data rates, and complexity of data analysis as irreplaceable 
tools for handling high-statistics, rare, and exotic particle searches.
3.1.3   –    Major Initiatives: Early Implementation  
of MIRT and DUNE Phase II 
Following Recommendation 2b, we envision that DUNE  Phase II will include early imple-
mentation of an enhanced 2.1-MW beam using MIRT, a third far detector, and an upgraded 
near detector complex.
Early implementation of MIRT  enables beam operations at 2.1 MW to start promptly, 
permitting DUNE  to achieve Phase I design exposure of 120 kt•MW •yr by the mid- 2030 s, 
the original planned timescale. MIRT  achieves higher beam power prior to a booster re-
placement by making several changes to the Fermilab accelerator complex. In particular, 
enhancements of the acceleration and magnet systems reduce the cycle time of the Main 
Injector and the LBNF  target station components, thereby delivering a given beam intensity 
more frequently. Reliability of the booster synchrotron becomes critical during this period 
and must be assessed and likely addressed through additional measures as described 
in section 6.6.2. The changes would enable a robust determination of the neutrino mass 
ordering by the middle of the next decade (Recommendation 2b). 
Phase II completion leaves DUNE  poised to deliver the most precise measurement of 
the CP phase across a range of possible CP phase space. Dune Phase II is the ultimate 
long-baseline experiment based on a proton-derived, high-intensity neutrino beam and 
is designed to cover a broad spectrum of neutrino energies, enabling an in-depth explo-
ration of neutrino oscillation quantum mechanics throughout multiple oscillation cycles. 
Thus, the experiment will comprehensively test the validity of the three-flavor neutrino 
oscillation framework with best-in-class precision and will search for signatures of unex-
pected neutrino interactions. In addition, DUNE ’s long baseline and high neutrino energy 
provide unique sensitivity to matter effects and new neutrino interactions, and they allow 
us to study the direct appearance of tau neutrinos.
To fully achieve these goals, DUNE  must collect an extremely large sample of neu-
trinos and gain exquisite control of the relevant systematic uncertainties. The requisite 
statistics depend on the MIRT  upgrade and the expansion of the DUNE  Far Detector. The 
increased detector volume provided by an additional far detector module ( FD3) leverages 
international partnerships and benefits all aspects of the DUNE  science program, including 
those, like supernova neutrino burst studies, that are independent of the neutrino beam. 
Together these upgrades more than quadruple the DUNE  Phase I exposure to achieve 
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel3: Decipher the Quantum Realm 37
600 kt•MW •yr by the mid- 2040 s, the originally envisioned timescale. At this integrated ex-
posure we expect statistical and systematic uncertainties to be roughly balanced, giving 
DUNE  significant and unique discovery potential across the neutrino mixing landscape.
With higher statistics, control of systematic uncertainties (such as those arising from 
the interaction of neutrinos and nuclei) becomes increasingly crucial. An MCND , a gas 
target combined with a magnetic field and electromagnetic calorimeter, is indispensable 
for this purpose. In addition, by being exposed to the world’s most intense neutrino beam, 
it will create a unique laboratory for the discovery of novel particles and interactions, 
many of which could shed light on the nature of dark matter and possible hidden sectors.
The opportunities opened by DUNE  Phase II shine brightest when complemented by 
a strong theory effort. The interaction of neutrinos and nuclei represents a complex many-  
body quantum problem, and significant theoretical work is required to gain quantitative 
understanding at a subatomic or nuclear level. This work will further reduce systematic 
uncertainties. Similarly, theoretical models of new physics will help interpret any anomalies 
or surprises in DUNE  data. In fact, new developments in theory can open up the science 
opportunities of new physics searches both at the near and far detectors, many of which 
are not directly related to neutrinos. 
 
3.1.4   –    Future Opportunities: DUNE FD4,  
the Module of Opportunity
 
The advent of MIRT  will enable rapid acquisition of beam neutrino statistics and allow 
DUNE  to achieve 600 kt•MW •yr without deploying a fourth detector module ( FD4). This 
paves the way for an expanded physics program, featuring an upgraded, more efficient 
detector with enhanced charge reconstruction capabilities. Such a detector would allow 
for full exploitation of the long baseline neutrino program. A more capable detector with 
significantly improved light collection, charge granularity, and high radiochemical purity 
would push the detector energy threshold down to MeV, or lower, while improving track 
and energy reconstruction.
A range of alternative targets, including low radioactivity argon, xenon-doped argon, 
and novel organic or water-based liquid scintillators, should be considered to maximize 
the science reach, particularly in the low-energy regime. Increased radiochemical purity 
would enhance detection sensitivity to low-energy supernova burst neutrinos, and in some 
cases even to coherent elastic neutrino-nucleus scattering ( CEvNS ) interactions triggered 
by a nearby core-collapse supernova. An upgraded detector module will provide excellent 
prospects for underground physics, including direct dark matter detection, exotic dark 
matter searches, and expanded sensitivity to solar neutrinos. R&D for advanced detector 
concepts should be supported.
The plethora of science opportunities has already sparked wide international interest 
and has been discussed in DUNE -organized workshops featuring presentations of novel 
technologies and detection approaches to improve DUNE ’s capabilities. Maximizing the 
physics potential will require input from all stakeholders: the DUNE  collaboration, US funding 
agencies, and the international community. A decision-making process led by DOE, inclusive 
Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle Physics3: Decipher the Quantum Realm 38
of the entire community and driven by all stakeholders, will ensure that the full potential 
of the FD4 is realized. The timeline should be driven by the most promising scientific  
opportunities and must include the long-baseline science program (Recommendation 4d). 
 
3.1.5   –    Interplay with Other Measurements  
of Neutrino Properties
 
Understanding the origins of neutrino mass is one of the big questions in physics. How-
ever, neutrino masses have not yet been directly measured. There are three approaches 
to measuring the neutrino mass: direct kinematic mass searches in nuclear beta decay, 
neutrinoless double beta decay, and cosmology. The first two approaches are under the 
stewardship of the DOE nuclear science program. Similarly, the question of whether neu-
trinos are their own antiparticles—Majorana particles—is one of the top science topics 
highlighted in the recent Nuclear Science Advisory Committee ( NSAC ) long-range plan 
via the pursuit of ton-scale neutrinoless double beta decay experiments. Measurements 
of the mass ordering by the particle physics program set the expected scale for these 
experiments. Their outcome is one of the most eagerly anticipated pieces to the puzzle 
of neutrino mass. 
Neutrino mass also affects structure formation in the universe. Hence, careful mea-
surements of the distribution of mass in the universe are sensitive to neutrino masses 
in the range of values indicated by neutrino oscillation. Cosmological surveys DESI  and 
CMB -S4 can probe the sum of neutrino masses, and that information can be directly 
confronted with the mass ordering measured by DUNE . IceCube  and its upgrades test 
neutrino mixing at high energies and cosmic distances. Any disparities between these 
two realms would constitute a discovery with profound implications for our understanding 
of the universe’s fundamental properties.
Many models of neutrino mass generation require the neutrino to have heavy part-
ners. In some cases, those partners can be tested in beam dump experiments like the 
MCND  of DUNE . For other mass ranges, those partners can be searched for at the LHC 
or future 10 TeV colliders.
3.1.6   –    New Initiative: A Portfolio of Agile  
Projects for Neutrinos
 
A healthy portfolio of agile experiments focused on neutrino physics and capable of deliv-
ering transformative insights and technological advancements is essential to the future of 
the field. To advance the understanding of neutrinos, a multifaceted approach must sup-
port a versatile and dynamic portfolio of ASTAE  experiments, as described in section 6.2.
Key breakthroughs in neutrino physics have been achieved through experiments 
that shed light on hidden facets of neutrino interactions and resolve outstanding neutrino 
anomalies. These experiments highlight the potential for discovery science in agile neu-
trino projects. Accurate measurements are also important for a deeper understanding 
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel3: Decipher the Quantum Realm 39
of neutrinos, their interactions, energy spectra, and flux, and their roles in astrophysical 
phenomena and long-baseline neutrino oscillation experiments. The adaptability and de-
ployment flexibility of agile experiments, whether near beams or reactors, offer promise for 
synergistic explorations of hidden-sector particles and other phenomena in the evolving 
field of physics beyond the Standard Model ( BSM ). Development of technologies such 
as innovative materials and unique sensors is critical to shaping the future of neutrino 
experiments.
The ASTAE  portfolio for neutrinos should encompass precise measurements of neu-
trino interactions, comprehensive neutrino flux assessments, and searches for neutrino 
BSM physics, coupled with development of cutting-edge technologies for future detectors 
(Recommendation 3a). 
3.1.7   –   20-Year Vision
 
The collaborative efforts of DUNE , Hyper-Kamiokande, and the global oscillation pro-
gram, including JUNO , could definitively validate the framework of three-flavor neutrino 
oscillations. The experimental outcomes of the first several years of operation will guide 
the future vision of DUNE , honing in on the complete picture of neutrino oscillations and 
even the physics of tau neutrinos, the least explored elementary particle of the Standard 
Model. Should there emerge indications of a paradigm shift such as CPT violation or of 
neutrino non-standard interactions, DUNE ’s long baseline with large matter effects and 
Hyper-Kamiokande’s shorter baseline with small matter effects will be critical in discerning 
this exciting new physics.
If there are hints of a need for heightened precision, muon-decay based neutrino 
beams emerge as the logical choice to enhance measurement accuracy. Depending on 
the nature of the departure from three-flavor oscillations, this could entail the deployment 
of a low-energy muon storage ring, as exemplified by the Neutrinos from Stored Muons 
(nuSTORM ) experiment. This is certainly the case if novel neutrino types or interactions 
mediated by light new particles come into play. A facility like nuSTORM  also has the poten-
tial to significantly refine our understanding of neutrino-nucleus interaction cross sections.
In cases where subtler signs of new particles or interactions surface, a muon storage 
ring with stored muon energies in the tens of GeV or higher range, commonly known as 
a neutrino factory, emerges as the most suitable source of neutrinos. Regardless of the 
specific approach, all muon-decay-based neutrino sources offer unparalleled precision, 
well-characterized beams, and potent synergies with muon collider research and devel-
opment efforts.
Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle Physics3: Decipher the Quantum Realm 40
3.2  
Reveal the Secrets of  
the Higgs Boson
3.2.1   –   Science Overview
 
The Higgs boson is an extraordinary and unique particle that is connected to the most 
puzzling questions of particle physics, including the origin of flavor, the matter-antimatter 
asymmetry, dark matter and dark energy, and inflation. The Higgs boson differs from 
other particles in that it is a remnant of the Higgs field that is “frozen” and permeates the 
universe. The field disturbs and slows down the motion of every elementary particle. The 
Higgs boson slows electrons in atoms so that they stay within the atom instead of flying 
off into space. Without the Higgs boson, or field, every electron in every atom would move 
at the speed of light and everything, including us, would evaporate in a nanosecond. 
The Higgs boson is the only known fundamental particle that has no spin angular 
momentum, which permits it to have unique behavior: it can interact with all known matter 
particles and give them mass, depending on the strength of the interaction. The Higgs 
boson also provides a novel and distinct gateway to as yet unknown particles, such as 
dark matter.
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel3: Decipher the Quantum Realm 41
Given the unique nature of the Higgs boson and its crucial role in holding together 
the atoms of the universe, the hunt for it was intense and extensive, beginning in 1964  
with both theoretical and experimental efforts. The Higgs boson was discovered to great 
fanfare in 2012 by an international effort at the LHC at CERN  in Switzerland, with crucial 
contributions from the US community.
Major questions remain about the nature of the Higgs boson. We do not know if the 
Higgs field is a fundamental field, or if it is actually a composite field made from other 
constituents. We do not know if there is only one Higgs boson, or if there is a richer sector 
containing related particles with new dynamics. We do not know why the Higgs boson 
mass should be as low as it is in the absence of additional particles with similar masses 
that would stabilize it, or why the mass is not zero in the first place. We do not know if the 
Higgs boson can decay to non-Standard Model particles. The interactions of the Higgs 
boson with the matter particles—the generation of fermion masses and mixings—involve 
the largest number of experimentally measured Standard Model parameters whose val-
ues and pattern are not predicted by any theory. Understanding this pattern may shed 
light on important questions such as the matter-antimatter asymmetry and the origin of 
neutrino masses. 
The properties of the Higgs field play a fundamental role in the evolution of the universe 
and the attributes of the other Standard Model particles. The Higgs field is unique in that 
it is the only known fundamental field that has a non-zero value in the vacuum state. In 
the early universe, all the Standard Model particles were massless and the fundamental 
forces behaved differently than they do today. As the universe cooled, the Higgs field 
acquired its current non-zero value. This “electroweak” phase transition, in turn, led to 
a universe in which the Standard Model particles acquired their current masses and the 
fundamental forces assumed their current form.
The characteristics of the electroweak phase transition are determined by the inter-
actions of the Higgs field with itself (“Higgs self-coupling”) which determines the field’s 
potential energy (“Higgs potential”). How this transition happened and which of the puz-
zling phenomena in our understanding of the universe are related to this phase transition 
remain central questions in particle physics. Modifications to the potential and related 
phase transition, beyond the Standard Model predictions, could provide explanations for 
the dominance of matter over antimatter in the universe.
The fate of the universe depends on the properties of the Higgs sector. Extrapolations 
of the currently understood Higgs potential to extremely high energy, using the Standard 
Model, indicate that the current vacuum state of the Higgs field is not only metastable—
not eternally stable—but that the universe is very close to the crossover point between 
stability and metastability. Further information about the potential will help interpret the 
meaning of this result. The Higgs boson may even be related to the field that drove the 
cosmological inflation, called the inflaton field, or to the mysterious dark energy that drives 
the current accelerated expansion of the universe, both of which require fields of zero spin.
The fact that the properties of the Higgs field are connected to so many of the funda-
mental questions in particle physics highlights the central role of the Higgs boson and the 
importance of understanding all aspects of the Higgs field. The quest to reveal the true 
Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle Physics3: Decipher the Quantum Realm 42
nature of the Higgs sector is multi-faceted, requiring dedicated experimental and theoret-
ical programs, and it necessitates pushing the frontiers of both precision and energy. In 
the near term, the LHC and its successor the HL-LHC are crucial for studying the Higgs 
field. In the longer term, future colliders will be essential for precision measurements of 
the Higgs sector and for a definitive measurement of the Higgs potential. 
3.2.2   –   Ongoing Projects: ATLAS, CMS, and HL-LHC
The 2012 discovery of the Higgs boson by the ATLAS  and CMS  experiments at the LHC was 
a watershed moment in particle physics; it completed the Standard Model and provided 
the first observation of a fundamental particle with zero spin. The dataset collected since 
then has provided a wealth of new measurements related to the Higgs sector. ATLAS  
and CMS  have measured the Higgs boson mass to better than 0.2%, have established 
that it has zero spin, and have made initial measurements of its lifetime using quantum 
interference effects. The interactions, or couplings, of the Higgs boson with some of the 
Standard Model particles ( W and Z bosons and third-generation charged fermions) have 
been measured to 5–10% precision.
All the major production modes of the Higgs boson have been observed, with the 
experimental sensitivity of some modes nearing the precision of state-of-the-art theory 
predictions, which are at a few percent-level accuracy. This level of precision constrains 
the scale of new BSM physics to be above a few hundred GeV to a TeV, depending on the 
model (see section 5 for further discussion). However, the LHC is still far from probing 
the detailed shape of the Higgs potential to the degree needed to probe the electroweak 
phase transition described above. Specifically, more precise measurements of the Higgs 
self-coupling are needed.
The next phase of the LHC, the HL-LHC, will commence in 2029  and dramatically in-
crease the rate of particle collisions that can occur (Recommendation 1a). This challenge 
will be handled with new, upgraded detectors that build upon innovations in instrumenta-
tion and state-of-the-art technology. Advances in software and computing (including AI/
ML) will enable experiments to gather more data and detect rare events at a greater rate. 
About 180 million Higgs bosons are expected to be produced during the HL-LHC run in 
each experiment, a factor of 10 more than what is projected for the current LHC run. This 
large dataset is expected to improve our understanding of the Higgs boson in a major way.
Many of the Higgs boson couplings to other Standard Model particles will be measured 
to a precision within a few percent or lower. Increasing the precision of these measure-
ments to sub-percent level will provide sensitivity to BSM  physics above a TeV in mass. 
The HL-LHC will enable measurements of the rare decay of the Higgs to muon pairs and 
thus show that the Higgs boson also generates the mass of second-generation fermions. 
The Higgs couplings will also be tested at the 2% level if the Higgs boson decays to un-
detected particles lighter than half its mass, such as, for example, dark matter.
For the first time, the Higgs potential will be tested experimentally; the HL-LHC will be 
able to say if and how strongly the Higgs boson couples to itself, and whether the Higgs 
field’s potential energy has the form predicted by the Standard Model, with precision of 
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel3: Decipher the Quantum Realm 43
around 50%. Deviations of the Higgs potential from the Standard Model predictions can 
have important implications related to the matter-antimatter asymmetry, as well as the 
ultimate fate of the universe. 
Higgs boson physics can only be studied at high-energy collider experiments, which 
are currently limited to the LHC and HL-LHC. Longer-term, future colliders, described be-
low, will further our understanding of the Higgs boson by testing its couplings to lighter 
quarks, by improving the precision of the Higgs couplings, and by measuring the Higgs 
potential. Advances in theoretical calculations of Higgs properties will be required to fully 
understand the experimental results. 
3.2.3   –   Major Initiative: Higgs Factory
 
Beyond the HL-LHC, a Higgs factory will produce large numbers of Higgs bosons with 
small backgrounds and enable more detailed studies of Higgs boson properties and 
interactions (Recommendation 2c). Defined as an electron-positron collider that can 
cover the center-of-momentum energy range of 90 GeV to 350 GeV, a Higgs factory can 
measure couplings with smaller uncertainties than the HL-LHC due to a combination of 
more precise knowledge of the momentum of the incoming particles, smaller background 
environments, and better detector resolutions. Higgs factories offer significant advantag-
es to measuring the production of the Higgs boson. For example, lepton colliders allow 
us to identify the presence of a Higgs boson independent of how it decays, and hence 
provide an unbiased sample for a model-independent and high-precision measurement 
of its properties. This unique feature will also allow a Higgs factory to improve searches 
for Higgs boson decay to unknown invisible particles, such as dark matter, by an order 
of magnitude over the HL-LHC, and to improve the sensitivity for unexpected decays into 
detected particles by up to four orders of magnitude in some cases. Further discussion 
of these capabilities can be found in section 5.1.
Furthermore, such a collider will enable very strong consistency checks within the 
electroweak sector of the theory by testing it through quantum loops that relate the mass-
es of the heaviest Standard Model particles: the W and Z bosons, the top quark, and the 
Higgs boson. The precision of measurements of the masses, the Higgs boson width, and 
its interactions with other particles will be improved by up to a factor of 10 compared to 
the HL-LHC. For example, a precision of 0.1–0.2% will be achieved on its coupling to the 
Z, which will extend the reach for new BSM  physics by tens of TeV, well-beyond the HL-
LHC reach (section 5.2). A Higgs factory will also significantly improve the knowledge of 
the coupling to the charm quark, and potentially also the coupling to the strange quark. 
 
3.2.4   –    Future Opportunities: 10 TeV Parton  
Center-of-Momentum Colliders
On a longer timescale, a 10 TeV pCM collider—for example, a 10 TeV muon collider, FCC-hh, 
or possibly a wakefield-based e+e– collider—will enable a comprehensive physics portfolio 
that includes ultimate measurements in the Higgs sector and also a broad search program 
Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle Physics3: Decipher the Quantum Realm 44
(Recommendation 4a). A precise measurement of the coupling of the Higgs boson to 
itself will tell us about the shape of the Higgs potential, which feeds into the behavior of 
the electroweak phase transition and has consequences related to the matter-antimatter 
asymmetry and the ultimate fate of the universe. At the HL-LHC a measurement of the 
Higgs self-coupling with a precision of 50% should be possible. However, a precision of 
5%—an order of magnitude improvement—will dramatically enhance our knowledge of 
the potential and be sufficient to discover or rule out many models which could explain 
the matter-antimatter asymmetry. This can only be achieved with a collider with 10 TeV 
or greater pCM, due to the greatly enhanced rate of production of events with multiple 
Higgs bosons that are needed for measuring the Higgs self-coupling.
At 10 TeV pCM energies, an extremely large number of Higgs bosons will be produced. 
As a result, these facilities will be able to further improve measurements of Higgs boson 
couplings, especially for rarer decays such as muon pairs or a Z boson and a photon, 
which furthers the mass reach to new particles well beyond that of the HL-LHC. Colliders 
at 10 TeV will also be the first opportunity to improve the measurement of the strength of 
the top quark-Higgs boson coupling after the HL- LHC, due to the high collision energy 
required. Overall, the precision on the Higgs couplings increases by an order of magni-
tude or more at a 10 TeV pCM collider compared to the HL-LHC, achieving sub-percent 
level precision.
A unique aspect of a 10 TeV pCM collider is its potential to directly probe the causes 
of possible deviations in Higgs boson properties. At a Higgs factory, a deviation in the 
measured Higgs couplings would generally point to new physics outside the direct dis-
covery reach of that collider. A 10 TeV pCM collider, on the other hand, would enable both 
precision measurements that illustrate indirect effects of new physics on Higgs properties 
and also direct discovery of the particles responsible. 
Overall, 10 TeV pCM colliders have a broad search program with a high potential for 
observing additional Higgs bosons if they exist. They can also directly probe hidden-  
sector physics through Higgs exotic decays. This and the broader science case for a 10 
TeV pCM collider is discussed further in section 5.1.
3.2.5   –   20-Year Vision
 
In 20 years the HL-LHC program will be completed, a Higgs factory will be preparing to 
take data, and a vigorous R&D program will be paving the path to a 10 TeV pCM collider. 
Each of these projects will fill in the map of the Higgs boson’s behavior in complementary 
ways: The HL-LHC will deliver the first draft, the Higgs factory will provide incredible de-
tail in key areas of the landscape, and the 10 TeV pCM collider will reveal the challenging 
heights of the Higgs boson’s interaction with itself.
Every refinement will provide an opportunity to test whether the Higgs boson does 
in fact give masses to other particles as expected, to determine if it is a fundamental 
object or in fact composed of other particles, to see if it has unexpected interactions, 
and to verify that it bootstraps its own mass as predicted by the Standard Model. These 
studies, propelled by advances in theory, and software and computing, will enable us to 
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel3: Decipher the Quantum Realm 45
obtain a much clearer picture of the Higgs boson and a better understanding of how it 
has shaped our universe. 
This roadmap relies on the design and construction of accelerators and detectors 
at the forefront of particle physics. The technology choices for achieving the Higgs fac-
tory and 10 TeV pCM collider goals need to be determined based on technical feasibility, 
cost-effectiveness, host site capacity, sustainability, and synergies with the demands 
of other science topics. The European Strategy for Particle Physics Update, which typ-
ically includes scientists and funding agency representatives from the US, is planned 
for later this decade and will be a milestone in the decision process. In this context, a 
separate panel (Recommendation 6) is recommended to provide additional guidance to 
the accelerator program.
Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle Physics

 47
 4
Illuminate  
the  
Hidden  
Universe
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel
Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle Physics4: Illuminate the Hidden Universe 48
Looking out into the night sky, we see pinpricks of light surrounded 
by darkness. Everything we see in the universe, including stars, 
planets, and plumes of interstellar gas, makes up only 5% of the 
universe. There is a vast hidden universe of dark matter and dark 
energy that is responsible for guiding the evolution of the cosmos 
itself, from forming the structures of matter to driving an accelerated 
expansion that will determine the ultimate fate of the universe. 
The ɅCDM  cosmological paradigm captures the physics that describes how the universe 
has changed over cosmic time. In the first tiny fraction of a second after the Big Bang, 
the universe underwent rapid, accelerated expansion called cosmic inflation, during which 
the seeds of the structure that was to come were created. The universe continued to ex-
pand and cool, evolving from its earliest moments of being filled with light, to the epoch 
of galaxy formation driven by dark matter, to the current era of accelerated expansion 
driven by dark energy.
Although we do not yet understand the underlying nature of dark matter and dark 
energy, or the specific physical processes driving cosmic inflation, we do know that they 
are not described by the subatomic structures in the Standard Model. Answering some 
of the deepest questions about particle physics itself requires detailed studies of cosmic 
evolution to reveal the underlying nature of dark matter, dark energy, inflation, and other 
particles in the universe that might have played a role in driving cosmic evolution. 
To illuminate the hidden universe, our efforts are focused on two main science drivers:
 Determine the Nature of Dark Matter. The gravitational evidence for dark matter is over-
whelming. We have many ideas for what dark matter could be, with a handful of particularly 
compelling candidates having viable cosmological histories. The number of strong candi-
dates inspires a multifaceted campaign to determine the nature of dark matter by leveraging 
underground facilities, quantum sensors, telescopes, and accelerator-based probes.
 Understand What Drives Cosmic Evolution. The evolution of the universe has been deter-
mined by physical processes not described by the Standard Model, from the exponential 
expansion called inflation during the first moments of time, to intermediate periods dom-
inated by radiation (potentially including unknown light species) and dark matter, to the 
cosmic acceleration of today. Measuring the growth of cosmic structure and the expansion 
history of the universe through multiple complementary methods offers unique explorations 
into inflation and dark energy, while also yielding insights into neutrino properties and 
the possible existence of cosmic relic particles from the earliest moments of the cosmos.
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel4: Illuminate the Hidden Universe 49
4.1  
Determine the Nature  
of Dark Matter 
4.1.1   –   Science Overview 
 
Dark matter constitutes the vast majority of the universe’s mass, influencing its structure 
and galaxy formation through gravity. Despite this dominant influence, its particle com-
position and interactions beyond gravity remain unknown. This profound mystery drives 
research across all frontiers of our field.
Unraveling the dark matter enigma requires a diverse approach that falls into four 
main categories: cosmic surveys, accelerator-based experiments, indirect detection 
experiments, and direct detection experiments. Cosmic surveys probe the distribution 
of dark matter on a variety of length scales, yielding essential data about its properties 
and guiding the other approaches. The other three categories search for the particles 
themselves. Accelerator-based experiments attempt to produce the dark matter particles, 
while indirect detection experiments look for the cosmic messengers resulting from dark 
matter interactions. Finally, direct detection experiments focus on detecting dark matter’s 
interactions here on Earth. Each approach, guided by theoretical work, plays a vital role 
in increasing understanding of the nature of dark matter. 

Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle Physics4: Illuminate the Hidden Universe 50
The WIMP  has been the primary candidate for dark matter for three decades. With a 
mass between a few GeV and about a hundred TeV, the particle would have been created 
in great abundance at early cosmological times in thermal equilibrium with the universe. 
As the cosmos expanded and cooled, the WIMP  would fall out of equilibrium, which would 
result in the formation of the cold dark matter structures we observe today. 
The US has led significant efforts, using tools from all areas of particle physics, to 
seek evidence of the WIMP  through its interactions with Standard Model particles. These 
efforts have shown that if WIMP s are the dark matter, they must couple to the Standard 
Model very feebly. Detecting these extremely rare interactions requires large detectors. 
Because of strong motivation from theory for WIMP s as a dark matter candidate, the 
pursuit of these feeble couplings remains an important benchmark. 
Since the 2014  P5 report, progress in theory has expanded our understanding of 
other plausible dark matter candidates that have both compelling implications for particle 
physics and viable cosmological histories. These developments have been accompanied 
by significant advances in direct-detection technologies, particularly in quantum sensing, 
that have enabled discernment of the most minute signals. This convergence of theo-
retical developments and cutting-edge detection capabilities holds tremendous potential 
for discovery. 
One theoretical approach leads to models of dark matter interacting with the Standard 
Model through hidden-sector particles beyond the dark matter candidate. These new inter-
actions allow for the dark matter to be produced through mechanisms distinct from those 
of the WIMP , as well as permitting new dynamics within the hidden sector, such as dark 
matter self-interactions. Hidden-sector particles can be produced in accelerators, whereas 
innovative techniques can search for the cosmic dark matter particles themselves. This 
synergy of accelerator experiments and advanced detection methods could shed light 
on the nature of hidden-sector models and their crucial role in the dark matter puzzle. 
Another theoretical approach has led to wave-like dark matter candidates. These 
candidates possess masses less than 1 eV, making them so light that they behave more 
like waves than particles. As a result, detection techniques are inherently quantum in 
nature, pushing the boundaries of quantum sensing. Within this category are the highly 
compelling QCD  axion, which provides a solution to why interactions involving the strong 
force do not appear to show CP violation, and the related axion-like particles ( ALPs). These 
particles would have been abundantly produced during the early universe, but in contrast 
to the  WIMP , they would not have been in thermal equilibrium due to their light mass and 
small couplings. Instead, their abundance would have been dictated by the initial condi-
tions of the universe. They can be searched for directly, and cosmology and astrophysics 
measurements are pivotal in constraining the mass range of particles of interest.
Dark matter experiments currently taking data are venturing into unexplored terri-
tories and hold the potential for groundbreaking discoveries. Developments in detector 
instrumentation lay the foundation for future campaigns to identify dark matter in new 
scenarios (Recommendation 4d). Our recommendations provide a portfolio of projects, 
research, and tools, including theory and computational work (Recommendations 4b and 
4f), that can comprehensively target and characterize the dark matter model benchmarks. 
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel4: Illuminate the Hidden Universe 51
4.1.2   –    Ongoing Projects: Direct Detection, Indirect  
Detection,and Collider Searches
 
Ongoing projects probe dark matter using a complementary suite of techniques and tech-
nologies. The larger ones include: the LHC, which can produce electroweak-scale dark 
matter candidates in a controlled environment; IceCube , which has sensitivity to spin-  
dependent and ultra-heavy particle dark matter candidates; and the second-generation 
(G2) direct detection experiments, such as the DOE -funded LZ and Axion Dark Matter  
Experiment ( ADMX ) G2, the NSF-funded DarkSide -20k and XENONnT , and the jointly funded 
SuperCDMS  SNOLAB .
In the coming decade, the HL-LHC will be in a unique position to explore whether dark 
matter couples to the Higgs boson and to test weak scale supersymmetry and many other 
theories with dark matter candidates. The high energy and intensity of LHC collisions also 
enable auxiliary experiments searching for long-lived or feebly interacting hidden-sector 
particles. Both LZ and XENONnT  started data-taking in 2021 ; SuperCDMS  SNOLAB  and 
DarkSide -20k are scheduled to begin data-taking in 2025  and 2026 , respectively.
These experiments will improve the sensitivity to a wide range of models by more 
than an order of magnitude. The ADMX  has already excluded the QCD  axion for mass-
es between 2.66 µeV and 4.2 µeV and is currently working to push sensitivity to higher 
masses. These experiments should be supported to achieve their maximum sensitivity 
and potential (Recommendations 1a and 1e). This support should include the necessary 
theory and simulation work, as well as background modeling (Recommendation 4b).
4.1.3   –    New Initiative: A Portfolio of Agile Projects  
for Dark Matter  
In pursuit of understanding dark matter, a diverse and agile portfolio of ASTAE  experiments, 
as described in section 6.2, offers the potential for significant discoveries and technolog-
ical advancements. Small but sensitive detectors are ideal for studying low-mass dark 
matter since the needed size of the detectors scales roughly with the dark matter mass. 
This strategic approach focuses on two promising areas: hidden-sector models and QCD  
axions, both of which boast high-priority benchmark models that can best be addressed 
by this scale of experiment.
Accelerator-based searches for the production of hidden-sector particles leverage 
beam dumps at existing beamlines and have sensitivity to thermal benchmark models in 
the MeV–GeV mass range. The direct searches for these hidden-sector particles utilize 
innovative materials and ultra-low-noise detectors with the ability to detect down to sub- eV 
energy depositions to reach the benchmarks. This synergistic combination of approaches 
is necessary to understand and unlock the secrets of hidden-sector dark matter. 
The search for axions and ALPs is also well-suited for this agile portfolio. Specific 
QCD  axion models provide definitive benchmarks, and through a series of carefully de-
signed experiments, masses from 40 neV to 1 eV can be thoroughly explored. Additionally, 
Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle Physics4: Illuminate the Hidden Universe 52
these endeavors lay a foundation for even more ambitious projects that target the lightest 
masses falling within the range of 1 peV to 40 neV. 
This multi-faceted approach maximizes the potential for seminal discoveries and 
pushes the boundaries of what is measurable in the realm of dark matter. Notably, this 
portfolio has already been set in motion by the Dark Matter New Initiatives ( DMNI ) exper-
iments, which have completed their design phases and now await construction funding. 
These initiatives are integral components of the broader portfolio of ASTAE  experiments 
(Recommendation 3a; section 6. 2). 
4.1.4   –    Major Initiative: G3, the Ultimate WIMP  
Dark Matter Search
 
The next phase of the search for WIMP  dark matter requires experiments capable of reach-
ing roughly order-of-magnitude weaker interaction strengths than current experiments. 
A large Generation- 3 (G3) WIMP  dark matter search would build on the most successful 
designs of the current G2 experiments, providing sensitivity to dark matter-Standard Model 
interactions that are small enough that neutrinos become an irreducible background (the 
“neutrino fog”).
This improvement in reach would provide significant coverage of important bench-
mark WIMP  models, such as the constrained minimal supersymmetric extension to the 
Standard Model. Such a G3 experiment would also perform important measurements of 
solar and possibly supernova neutrinos. A G3 direct detection experiment would be the 
ultimate WIMP  search within the current approach; moving past the reach of the G3 ex-
periment and deeper into the neutrino fog would require significant changes in method 
and technology.
Although supporting more than one G3 experiment would be beneficial, expected costs 
are high enough, especially compared to the costs of the portfolio of smaller dark matter 
projects, that funding two does not appear feasible. Our recommendation supports one 
G3 experiment, preferably sited on US soil to help maintain US leadership (Recommenda-
tion 2d). Investment in the expansion of SURF , taking advantage of the DUNE  excavation 
infrastructure and potential private funding, would enable such siting. Continued support 
by both DOE and NSF is needed to maximize the science and US leadership. A second, 
complementary G3 experiment would maximize the discovery potential and would teach 
us more about dark matter if one of the G2 experiments has promising results. 
4.1.5   –   New Initiatives: IceCube-Gen2 & CTA
 
In the next decade, NSF-funded astrophysical gamma-ray and neutrino observatories 
will provide unprecedented views of the high-energy universe. These observatories will 
look for cosmic messenger particles that are made in dark matter interactions (Recom-
mendations 2e and 3c). In addition, observations of photons, cosmic rays, neutrinos, and 
gravitational waves can give a more complete picture of the physics that drives the most 
energetic sources in the universe. 
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel4: Illuminate the Hidden Universe 53
The IceCube -Gen2  Observatory will provide a tenfold improvement in sensitivity to 
astrophysical neutrinos over the IceCube  Observatory, and will be the most sensitive probe 
of heavy decaying dark matter. IceCube -Gen2 ’s wide-ranging particle physics portfolio 
also includes searching for signatures of neutrino physics beyond the Standard Model. In 
addition, IceCube -Gen2  has a wide-ranging multi-messenger astrophysics portfolio, which 
gives us a more complete picture of the physics that drives the most energetic sources 
in the universe that produce the highest energy neutrinos and cosmic rays.
The CTA offers a parallel improvement in sensitivity to very-high-energy gamma 
rays, along with refined energy resolution over an expanded energy range and a more 
sharply resolved picture of the gamma-ray sky. The CTA and the Southern Wide-field 
Gamma-ray Observatory ( SWGO ) provide sensitivity to WIMP  thermal targets that lie be-
yond the reach of the G3 direct detection experiments. The CTA’s excellent energy and 
angular resolution play a key role in disentangling a dark matter signal from conventional 
astrophysical backgrounds. Beyond dark matter, the CTA’s broad astrophysics portfolio 
will provide insights into the most extreme environments in the universe and the origin 
and role of relativistic cosmic particles.
4.1.6   –    Complementarity: Astrophysical  
and Cosmological Probes
 
Astrophysical and cosmological probes, such as observations of the Milky Way satellite 
galaxies, stellar streams, strong lensing systems, and the CMB , can map the distribution 
of dark matter on small length scales where the standard cold and collisionless nature of 
dark matter may break down. On these scales new interactions among dark matter parti-
cles, which are predicted in many hidden-sector models, can lead to structure-formation 
phenomena such as halo core formation or gravo-thermal collapse that would be absent 
in WIMP  or QCD  axion models. The insights gained could guide terrestrial experiments.
Similarly, a dearth of dark matter structure on small scales could be indicative of dark 
matter with a significant thermal velocity, the quantum pressure from an ultra-light axion, or 
dark matter particles that had significant interactions with relativistic species in the recent 
past. CMB -S4 will have exquisite sensitivity to such light species that reside in hidden-sector 
models. Over the next decade Rubin/ LSST  is expected to discover a large number of new 
Milky Way satellites, stellar streams, and strong lensing systems. Follow-up observations 
of these objects with existing ancillary telescope resources or future observatories, such 
as DESI -II and Spec -S5, combined with state-of-the-art cosmological simulations and anal-
yses, will access parameter space inaccessible to laboratory experiments.
Thus, developing a comprehensive understanding of the nature of dark matter re-
quires the complementary support of both astrophysical and terrestrial probes. In practice 
this can be done within the DOE  HEP Cosmic Frontier model by supporting individuals 
contributing to the primary HEP science goals of ongoing projects ( DESI , Rubin/ LSST , 
and DESC ) to also carry out complementary work on dark matter as a secondary science 
goal. In addition, computational and modeling work relevant to astrophysical probes can 
be performed with theory support. 
Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle Physics4: Illuminate the Hidden Universe 54
4.1.7   –   20-Year Vision
 
The program outlined above encompasses a series of experiments planned for this de-
cade that hold immense potential for discovery. Simultaneously, it nurtures the growth of 
next-generation experiments. Over a 20-year timeframe, this carefully curated portfolio 
of experiments will conduct targeted searches encompassing WIMP , hidden-sector, and 
QCD  axion dark matter models. The investments in the construction of a Higgs factory 
and in the R&D and technology tests and demonstrators for a 10 TeV pCM collider will be 
essential steps toward achieving unprecedented sensitivity to feebly coupled particles 
(see section 5.1). Reaching the 10 TeV scale is needed to achieve definitive covering of 
the thermal targets for minimal WIMP candidates.
Meanwhile, astrophysical probes will provide complementary insights into the nature 
of dark matter. Discoveries would be followed up with studies by multiple means with im-
proved sensitivity, informed by this proposed portfolio of experiments. These endeavors 
not only foster the development of novel technologies but also challenge the limits of what 
can be effectively measured. Acting as a vital bridge, theory interconnects diverse mea-
surements and guides us toward uncharted avenues of exploration. This multi-pronged 
strategy, harmonizing experiments of varying scales, theoretical frameworks, and tech-
nological advancements, provides a coherent roadmap that optimizes the potential for 
seminal discoveries.
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel
4: Illuminate the Hidden Universe 55
4.2  
Understand What Drives  
Cosmic Evolution
4.2.1   –   Science Overview
 
The dynamical evolution of the universe is deeply connected to its energy content. At its 
earliest moments, the universe was sensitive to particle physics processes at energies far 
beyond what can be probed even in the LHC, today’s most powerful particle accelerator. 
As the universe expanded and cooled, clues about those early high-energy phenomena 
were imprinted on the CMB , the distribution of cosmic matter and light. Those clues allow 
us to probe new physics that is inaccessible by other means, playing an essential role in 
advancing our knowledge of particle physics. 
As we peer into the night sky, we see the cumulative effect of the multiple eras that 
the universe has gone through to reach its present rich structure. The earliest epoch was 
an era of apparent accelerated expansion, referred to as inflation, during which the ini-
tial seeds of structure were created. Once inflation ended, the universe transitioned to a 
hot radiation era in which ultra-relativistic particles dominated its energy density. During 
that era, new light species predicted by many promising theories beyond the Standard 
Model could leave subtle signatures on the evolution of the universe and give insight to 
the nature of dark matter. The matter era that followed allowed the universe to mature 
Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle Physics4: Illuminate the Hidden Universe 56
under the dominant influence of dark matter and form the stars, galaxies, and clusters 
now populating the cosmos. Most recently, the universe entered another era of acceler-
ated expansion, requiring dark energy to form the majority of the energy budget of the 
universe today. 
The key particle physics questions about the universe’s evolution that cosmic surveys 
seek to answer are the following: What physics is responsible for the rapid, accelerated 
expansion during the early inflationary era? Were there extra light species beyond pho-
tons and neutrinos present in the universe during the radiation-dominated era? What is 
driving the current accelerated expansion of the universe?
Answering these questions requires scientists to develop a detailed understanding 
of (i) the nature, properties, and type of primordial fluctuations created during the infla-
tionary era, (ii) the evolution and growth of these initial fluctuations into the visible objects 
we observe today, and (iii) the cosmic expansion history of the universe. The current 
paradigm for addressing these questions attributes the recent cosmic acceleration to a 
cosmological constant, a uniform repulsive energy throughout the universe. However, 
some tensions arise when attempting to consistently interpret both early and recent ex-
pansion data within this framework. These tensions may hint at physics that requires a 
significant paradigm shift. 
The early universe’s primordial fluctuations, resulting from inflation, reveal critical 
insights into the physics of that era. These primordial fluctuations comprise energy density 
variations shaping the universe’s structure and gravitational waves indicating space-time’s 
response to high inflation energies. Analyzing the statistical properties of density fluctua -
tions through the distribution of galaxies and CMB  anisotropies uncovers the inflationary 
dynamics. Primordial gravitational waves leave a unique signature in CMB  polarization; 
that signature offers clues about fundamental physics at high energies. Post-inflation, 
the universe transitioned into a hot radiation phase that allowed investigation of new 
light particle species beyond the Standard Model. CMB  measurements provide essential 
constraints on these species. Future measurements may probe relics present during the 
quark-hadron transition and, eventually, light species present at temperatures above the 
electroweak scale. 
The matter-dominated epoch that followed the radiation-dominated era was recently 
interrupted by a burst of accelerated expansion driven by what is termed dark energy. The 
simplest explanation for dark energy, a cosmological constant ( Ʌ), is a pillar of the ɅCDM - 
cosmological paradigm, but confirming the nature of dark energy as either Λ or something 
else is a key science driver for our field. Investigating dark energy’s impact on cosmic 
structure growth and expansion history is crucial, with both observational and theoretical 
advances needed to distinguish between the cosmological constant of ɅCDM , more complex 
dark energy models, and alternative cosmological models with modified gravity.
Since the last P5 report, advances in our understanding of the early universe have 
been made through precise observations of the CMB’s temperature and polarization fluc -
tuations. The US-led ground-based observing program, including the BICEP  program, the 
South Pole Telescope ( SPT), the Atacama Cosmology Telescope ( ACT), and POLARBEAR , 
combined with the European Planck Satellite, have provided us with crucial bounds on 
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel4: Illuminate the Hidden Universe 57
the energy scale of inflation, the abundance of light relics in the early universe, and the 
sum of neutrino masses, in addition to shedding light on the fundamental nature of dark 
matter and dark energy.
Significant progress has also been made in building statistically consistent portfolios 
of observations from galaxy surveys with well-understood systematics. On the growth of 
structure, a combination of (i) gravitational lensing, (ii) the distribution of galaxies across 
time and distances, (iii) the abundance of galaxy clusters, and (iv) the velocities of galaxies 
near over-dense regions can precisely probe the parameters characterizing dark energy, 
determining whether it is consistent with a cosmological constant or has a dynamic of its 
own. For the cosmic expansion history, the transition from the past decelerating phase 
to the current era of accelerated expansion can be probed primarily through four types 
of measurements: the brightness of distant supernovae, strong lensing cosmography, 
the evolution in distance of a distinctive pattern in the distribution of galaxies known as 
the baryon acoustic oscillation signature, and gravitational wave standard sirens, which 
indicate cosmic distance. The major advances made by the Dark Energy Survey ( DES) 
and the extended Baryon Oscillation Spectroscopic Survey ( eBOSS ) in development and 
application of these measurement methods, and in theoretical modeling, have directly 
influenced the ongoing and new projects recommended in this P5 report.
Our recommended portfolio will enable seminal discoveries connected with these 
crucial scientific questions along with other secondary science cases noted below. It is 
important to note that support for computational work and theory efforts (Recommendations 
4b and 4f, as well as a robust workforce (Recommendation 5), are essential for realizing 
the scientific potential of the experiments described below.
4.2.2   –   Major Initiative: CMB-S4 
 
CMB -S4 is the transformative next-generation CMB  experiment, with the ambitious primary 
science goals of constraining the energy scale of inflation and determining the abundance 
of light relic particles in the early universe. CMB -S4 will also measure the sum of neutrino 
masses and probe the physics of dark matter and dark energy, in addition to a rich as-
trophysics program. This project will provide a significant advancement in sensitivity to 
gravitational waves produced by inflation and to light relics. Importantly, this sensitivity to 
light relics will extend beyond the quark-hadron transition, which is an important bench-
mark in searches for new physics. CMB -S4 construction is planned to begin in Chile and 
at the South Pole late in this decade (Recommendation 2a).
The current generation of ground-based CMB  experiments includes the South Pole 
Observatory ( BICEP  Array and the South Pole Telescope, both currently operating), and 
Simons Observatory. CMB -S4 builds on decades of experience from US-led ground-based 
CMB  experiments, but with increased sensitivity achieved by scaling up to nearly 500,000 
detectors. 
CMB -S4 presents an important opportunity for the field of particle physics: the dis-
covery of gravitational waves produced by inflation in the extremely early universe would 
provide a direct window to that previously inaccessible epoch in cosmic history and to 
Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle Physics4: Illuminate the Hidden Universe 58
the highest energy scales in the universe. CMB -S4 is designed to cross critical thresholds 
in the search for gravitational waves from inflation. Even a non-detection from CMB -S4 
would rule out large classes of inflation models, placing interesting constraints on the 
theoretical landscape. 
Achieving CMB -S4’s ambitious science goals requires installing telescopes at and 
observing from both the South Pole and Chile, which are proven sites with good observing 
conditions and infrastructure. For ground-based CMB  experiments, the unprecedented 
sensitivity to the physics of inflation that probes the highest energy scales in the universe 
is possible only at the South Pole. The site at the South Pole is unique in that it provides 
a dry, stable atmosphere with continuous observation of the same patch of sky. The site 
in Chile is complementary because Earth’s rotation leads to the ability to observe large 
portions of the sky, which is important for constraining the abundance of light relic parti-
cles. Coordination between DOE -HEP, NSF-AST, and NSF-OPP is critical for the success 
of CMB -S4. NSF-OPP and CMB -S4 should continue to work closely together to ensure that 
the logistics footprint of the project at the South Pole is consistent with site capabilities 
(see section 6.6.4). 
Given the planned landscape of ground- and space-based CMB  experiments, CMB -S4 
plays a unique role in using demonstrated technology with a two-site survey design that is 
crucial for addressing the key science goals. The two-site design ensures that the whole 
is far greater than the sum of its parts; it enables important crosschecks on systematics 
that would otherwise be impossible. CMB -S4 also provides important synergies with the 
space-based LiteBIRD  instrument, which aims to launch in the next decade and constrain 
the energy scale of inflation through a complementary technique.
4.2.3   –   Ongoing Projects: Rubin/LSST and DESC, DESI 
 
This decade will see tremendous advances in our understanding through the galaxy 
survey program established by the last P5 report: DESI  (a spectroscopic survey), and 
Rubin/ LSST . Rubin Observatory will carry out the LSST , a 10-year imaging survey, and the 
LSST  Dark Energy Science Collaboration ( DESC ) will carry out the fundamental physics 
analyses of LSST . DESI  and the LSST  will enable analyses with multiple complementary 
methods of both structure growth and expansion history of the universe, with extensive 
programs to control systematics (Recommendation 1e). In particular, these experiments 
will provide unprecedented constraints on cosmic acceleration using several probes of 
structure growth and expansion rate during the entire time period of cosmic acceleration. 
The experiments will also reach back into the weakly matter-dominated era, when the 
expansion was still decelerating. Strong support for operations and data analysis will 
ensure a return on the investment in these experiments. This program will stress-test the 
standard cosmological paradigm and is particularly powerful when combined with space-
based datasets (for example, from Euclid or the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope), 
with current CMB  surveys, and even more so with CMB -S4. These combinations would 
benefit from dedicated efforts towards joint analysis including N-body simulations and 
simulated survey products.
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel4: Illuminate the Hidden Universe 59
As these surveys yield discoveries about cosmic evolution and improve our under-
standing of how to robustly constrain the cosmological model despite astrophysical and 
observational systematics, the particle physics community should use that new under-
standing to formulate future galaxy surveys. This includes, during the first five years of 
LSST , engagement with discussions of the post- LSST  future of Rubin Observatory; and 
during DESI /DESI -II, refinement of Spec -S5 survey concepts. 
These cosmic surveys also have important secondary science goals, such as con-
straining the sum of the neutrino masses (providing complementary information with the 
measurements of the mass ordering by DUNE ) and dark matter (where astrophysical 
probes have an important place among other types of measurements).
4.2.4   –   New Initiative: DESI-II upgrade
 
The DESI -II program (Recommendation 3c) is a first step at going beyond the galaxy sur-
veys constructed as a result of the previous P5 report. Besides providing an opportunity 
for testing technology for next-generation spectroscopic surveys, its scientific goals in-
clude constraining cosmic acceleration by extending DESI  dark energy constraints deeper 
into the matter-dominated regime, and complementing/enhancing dark energy and dark 
matter science with Rubin/ LSST  by leveraging the power of overlapping spectroscopic 
and imaging surveys.
For example, the program could provide ~5%-level constraints on the dark energy 
density at a time when the standard cosmological paradigm predicts that it is only a few 
percent of the energy density of the universe. The program also provides opportunities for 
spectroscopic observations that would reduce key systematic uncertainties in Rubin/ LSST  
measurements of structure growth and cosmic expansion. Given the low construction cost 
for this extension to the DESI  project, executing DESI -II provides a high scientific return 
on the existing investments in both DESI  and Rubin/ LSST , especially as DESI -II will serve 
as a pathfinder for the next proposed major initiative, Spec -S5.
4.2.5   –   Future Opportunity: Spec-S5
 
The proposed next-generation spectroscopic survey, Spec -S5, holds great promise to 
advance our understanding and reach key theoretical benchmarks in several areas: in-
flationary physics via the statistical properties of primordial fluctuations, late-time cosmic 
acceleration, light relics, neutrino masses, and dark matter. The balance between these 
scientific goals, which affects survey design, should be refined in light of early DESI  and 
Rubin/ LSST  results. 
The coming years will see important preparations for Spec -S5—site selection and 
other crucial decision points—with support for necessary instrumentation R&D and re-
finement of the survey concept. Going beyond the capabilities of DESI -II and Rubin/ LSST , 
Spec -S5 will permit us to map cosmic expansion deep into the matter-dominated regime, 
while also enabling order-of-magnitude improvements in our understanding of the early 
era of cosmic inflation. Carrying out these preparations during the 2020 s, including the 
Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle Physics4: Illuminate the Hidden Universe 60
computational and theory work necessary to interpret the data, is essential to continuing 
the robust program of spectroscopic surveys.
Spec -S5 could be ready for construction at the end of this decade if key decisions 
regarding siting and other issues are resolved. With limited funds under the baseline 
budget scenario, the difficult choice was made to support Spec -S5 R&D (Recommendation 
4e) but not construction; that support would result in a significantly more mature survey 
concept for consideration for immediate construction by the next P5. However, in the 
event of exciting discoveries in DESI  and/or Rubin/ LSST , and in better funding scenarios, 
a more mature Spec -S5 concept should be considered for construction at the end of this 
decade (section 2.6.2).
4.2.6   –    Future Opportunities: Line Intensity Mapping  
and Gravitational Waves
 
Line intensity mapping ( LIM) techniques are potentially a valuable future method to 
address key particle physics science issues during the next 20 years by probing the 
expansion history and the growth of structure deep in the matter-dominated era when 
the first galaxies were forming. LIM observations of that era could enable tests of the 
theory of inflation by providing a precise map of tracers of structure formation, such 
as emission from primordial hydrogen gas or other atomic or molecular lines. This 
technique has the potential to access an earlier epoch in the universe than Spec -S5. 
Work in both analysis and instrumentation to prove the viability of this method should 
continue with multi-agency support (Recommendation 4e), including low-cost instru-
mentation development competed through the DOE  R&D  program. DOE  has already 
partnered with NASA  to construct one pathfinder LIM experiment, LuSEE -Night , and 
there are exciting opportunities for investment in ground-based activities in the com-
ing decade. 
Gravitational waves are a powerful new tool for exploring a range of astronomical 
and particle physics topics, including probing the expansion history of the universe using 
standard sirens. NSF has been an excellent steward of this program and should support 
the development of new capabilities and a next-generation project. The particle physics 
case for studying gravitational waves at all frequencies should be explored by expanded 
theory support. 
4.2.7   –   20-Year Vision
 
We are entering an exciting era in our study of cosmic evolution. The projects recommended 
by the last P5 report that are now beginning operations, the project portfolio recommended 
by this P5 report, and the future projects for which R&D and project definition will occur 
in this decade will allow for great progress in our knowledge of the entirety of our cosmic 
history, from the inflationary era, through the radiation and then matter dominated eras, to 
the dark energy era. Together with strong theory and computational support, that progress 
lays the foundation for the next generation of projects. 
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel4: Illuminate the Hidden Universe 61
To support the success of this portfolio of cosmic surveys at a range of wavelengths, 
continued work and advocacy will be important to prevent or mitigate the effects of  
human-produced nuisances, including light pollution, satellite constellations in low-
earth orbit, and radio-frequency interference. 
The knowledge gained from CMB-S4 and eventually from Spec-S5 will enlighten us 
about the nature of inflation at the earliest cosmic times, both in terms of the energy scale 
and the inflationary dynamics. We recommend pathfinding works in the next decade, 
specifically LIM R&D and research, that will allow us to follow up any detected primordial 
signal from the inflationary era. Moving forward in cosmic time to the radiation and matter 
eras, we will have a window to new relics during the quark-hadron transition, and lay the 
groundwork for future projects that can push down to the electroweak scale.
In the event of a discovery beyond the standard cosmological paradigm, LIM and 
high-resolution CMB experiments could be formulated to confirm and characterize the 
discovery. Future gravitational wave experiments could provide complementary means to 
probe the expansion history deeper in the matter era. And at late times, our recommended 
portfolio sets us up with multiple complementary means to rigorously test the cosmological 
constant hypothesis and discover the time evolution of dark energy.
The flexibility of Spec-S5 to address multiple scientific goals (inflation, late-time cos-
mic acceleration, dark matter) depending on the priorities that emerge from DESI, early 
DESI-II, and Rubin/LSST results makes it a crucial part of this 20-year vision. Similarly, 
future survey concepts for Rubin Observatory, to be developed later this decade after 
early LSST science results are available, could address key questions that come to the 
forefront of particle physics studies of cosmic evolution in five to ten years.
Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle Physics

Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel 63
 5
Explore  
New 
Paradigms  
in Physics
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel
Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle Physics5: Explore New Paradigms in Physics 64
The prevailing paradigms of particle physics and cosmology—the 
Standard Model and Ʌ CDM, respectively—are triumphs of experi -
mental ingenuity, theoretical creativity, and human curiosity. Together, 
these pillars of fundamental physics explain a vast range of phenom-
ena, from the gravitational scaffolding of the universe due to dark 
matter, to the complex structure of nuclei due to quarks and gluons. 
Particle physics lays the conceptual foundations for modern science, 
and it exemplifies the power of multigenerational and international 
collaborations to tackle grand scientific challenges.
The quest to understand the fundamental structure of the universe is far from over and 
mysteries remain. Our existence can be traced to a tiny difference between the amount of 
matter and antimatter in the early universe, which can be accommodated but not explained 
by the ɅCDM  model. The structure of atoms only requires one generation of matter par-
ticles, but the Standard Model has three generations, with no obvious pattern or logic to 
the triplication. A repeated theme in the history of physics is unification, where seemingly 
disparate phenomena turn out to be manifestations of a common structure. Although there 
are tantalizing theoretical opportunities for unification within these prevailing paradigms, 
none has thus far withstood experimental scrutiny.
Given these open questions, we explore new paradigms that might yield transfor-
mational insights into our universe. There are two broad strategies for venturing into the 
unknown:
 Search for Direct Evidence of New Particles. Experiments that seek direct evidence for 
new particles set the gold standard for discovery. Heavy particles can be produced at 
colliders with sufficiently high energies, whereas light but elusive particles can be pro-
duced at accelerator-based experiments with sufficiently high intensity. The discovery of 
new particles, or definitive evidence for their absence, would ignite major paradigmatic 
shifts and determine the direction of future research. 
 Pursue Quantum Imprints of New Phenomena. Even if new particles cannot be produced 
directly, they can still leave clues to their existence via quantum imprints on known par-
ticles. This is especially true if the new particles break a fundamental symmetry of the 
Standard Model. Many known particles were first detected indirectly through their quantum 
imprints, with follow-up direct experiments providing definitive evidence. This motivates 
continued investments in a broad search program for possible quantum imprints of new 
phenomena.
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel5: Explore New Paradigms in Physics 65
5.1
Search for Direct Evidence  
of New Particles
5.1.1   –   Science Overview
Particle physics is a field that earned its name through the discovery of many particles 
that were thought to be the fundamental building blocks of matter. This began with the 
extraordinary discovery that every object in our world is made of scores of chemical el-
ements. Each of those chemical elements is made of a particular kind of atom, with an 
atomic nucleus of specific electric charge surrounded by orbiting electrons that negate 
that electric charge. Although the electrons are understood to be point-like elementary 
particles with no internal structure, the atomic nuclei were discovered to consist of protons 
and neutrons. The number of protons in an atom’s nucleus determines the nature of the 
chemical elements that, in turn, determine the nature of every object we see. This was a 
unifying paradigm that explained the physical world around us. 
But nature is complicated, and further discoveries revealed that the proton and neu-
tron were made of fundamental particles called quarks bound together by a force particle 
called the gluon, carrier of the “strong force.” It was also discovered that many particles 
disintegrate over time into lighter ones. This led to the discovery of the “weak force,” which 

Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle Physics5: Explore New Paradigms in Physics 66
was later determined to be similar to electromagnetism. The weak force is mediated by 
massive W and Z bosons, as opposed to the massless photon. Through the process of 
direct observation of new particles, the community of particle physicists arrived at the 
current paradigm: the Standard Model of particle physics.
However, we also learned that the Standard Model is far from complete. From the 
establishment of the ɅCDM  paradigm of cosmology, we need dark matter, inflation, and 
dark energy, none of which are part of the Standard Model. For the moment, we do not 
know what led to the development of our matter-dominated universe which is suitable 
for life. When inflation started, the universe was much smaller than an atomic nucleus. 
Inflation rapidly turned energy into matter and expanded it to create the immense universe 
that exists today. Our current understanding is that this expansion must have resulted in 
an equal number of matter and antimatter particles. If it had stayed that way, however, 
all of the matter and antimatter particles would have annihilated each other, reverting 
back into pure energy.
Some physical process must have turned an extremely small fraction of the produced 
antimatter into matter, but the Standard Model does not explain this physical process. The 
model also lacks the quantum description of gravity consistent with the general theory 
of relativity developed by Albert Einstein early in the 20th century. It is increasingly clear 
that discovery of new particles and their interactions is awaiting us and is likely to come 
from the exploration of the energy frontier.
The answers to the current mysteries about the universe are believed to be related to 
not-yet-discovered physics at the electroweak energy scale, a fundamental scale of nature 
at about 100 GeV. The apparently arbitrary size of this scale affects parameters as diverse 
as the dimensions of atoms and the half-lives of radioactive nuclei. The mechanism that 
sets this fundamental energy scale, or temperature, is unknown, and almost all theoretical 
explanations require new particles with masses of the same order of magnitude as this 
scale. Cooling through this temperature is known as the electroweak phase transition 
and results in many fundamental particles acquiring masses. The strength of this phase 
transition may have implications for the origin of matter, or baryogenesis. Understanding 
the origin of this energy scale and the impact that the associated physics has on our 
universe is a major quest of particle physics today.
The most direct way of answering these questions is by discovering new fundamental 
particles. If these are very massive, they can only be produced directly in high-energy 
colliders, as the higher the collider energy the higher the mass that can be produced. 
Another possibility is that these particles are produced at lower energy but very rarely—for 
example, in decays of known particles such as the Higgs boson. Discovering these rare, 
lower energy particles requires accelerators that produce very high numbers of particles, 
including neutrino experiments with their high intensity beams and massive detectors.
These complementary approaches provide access to an extensive theoretical param-
eter space that covers both higher mass scales and new physics that is weakly coupled 
to the Standard Model. Overall, these searches can be broadly categorized into those 
that are guided by specific theoretical ideas, searches driven by questions resulting from 
experimental data (for example, dark matter), and searches that are model-agnostic and 
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel5: Explore New Paradigms in Physics 67
perform a general exploration of the unknown. Together, these approaches provide com-
prehensive coverage of the landscape beyond the Standard Model ( BSM ) and have the 
potential to yield groundbreaking insights into the universe.
A broad set of theoretical ideas guide BSM  searches at colliders. These include, 
for example, supersymmetry, a well-justified mathematical theory that predicts partner 
particles with a broad range of properties, and theories with composite particles or extra 
dimensions. A new experimental focus centers on maximizing the ability to identify exotic 
phenomena predicted by specific theories that are harder to find. Looking beyond specific 
models, experimental searches target exotic BSM  states, including new gauge bosons 
or Higgs bosons, fermions, and other resonances that are a feature of many Standard 
Model extensions, including the ones motivated by the smallness of the neutrino masses. 
Searches for dark matter are particularly well-motivated by many astrophysical and 
cosmological measurements that require BSM  explanations. Weakly interacting mas-
sive particles ( WIMP s) continue to be an important target for particle experiments, and 
high-energy colliders are well-suited to search for them. In a widely studied and simple 
WIMP  scenario, the dark matter particle is identified as a new heavy stable particle in 
the TeV range. In many scenarios the dark matter is only a part of the dark (or hidden) 
sector. Some of the hidden-sector particles may be directly observed through their tiny 
couplings to the Standard Model particles. Yet another class of candidates includes axion 
and axion-like particles. These typically couple very weakly to Standard Model particles 
and can be searched for at high-intensity beam-dump experiments, colliders, and dedi-
cated experiments (see also section 4.1).
The Higgs boson is connected to most of the fundamental questions about the uni-
verse and is an integral part of the collider search program. The question of whether the 
Higgs boson is an elementary particle or a composite particle built of more fundamental 
constituents remains an important mystery. Current constraints from resonance searches 
suggest that if the Higgs is composite, the relevant energy scale is beyond the TeV scale. 
Future colliders that explore this energy scale could reveal the composite structure. 
Another important question is whether there are additional Higgs bosons as predicted 
in supersymmetry models and elsewhere. The Higgs mechanism, as postulated in the 
Standard Model, is the most mathematically simple method to realize the electroweak 
symmetry breaking and give particles their masses. However, this simplicity causes se-
rious problems when extrapolating the Standard Model to high energies; for example, a 
fantastical accident is required to accommodate the observed mass of the Higgs boson. 
These problems are alleviated if additional particles related to the Higgs are introduced, 
which is why it is important to search for those. The search must be very wide, since even 
the simplest extensions to the Higgs sector display a broad range of phenomenology and 
connections to fundamental physics questions like the origins of the electroweak phase 
transition and baryogenesis.
The small natural width of the Higgs boson presents an opportunity for observing its 
decays into new particles even if the couplings between those particles and the Higgs 
are exceedingly small. Searches for exotic Higgs boson decays remain highly motivat -
ed even though the currently measured Higgs boson properties match the Standard 
Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle Physics5: Explore New Paradigms in Physics 68
Model expectations. Indeed, in many plausible scenarios these new particles could 
be our only direct window into physics beyond the Standard Model. These scenarios 
include decays into invisible particles, a mix of invisible and Standard Model particles, 
and complicated cascades with many-body final states. Long lifetimes are a generic 
feature of BSM  particles in these cascades, yielding hard-to-detect but extremely low 
background signatures. The rate of such decays can be very small, so large samples 
of Higgs bosons are needed. 
Specific examples of theoretical ideas and experimental searches that address some 
of the open questions in particle physics have been described above. However, the ex-
ploration of the energy frontier will allow us to observe exotic particles and interactions 
irrespective of whether or not they have been predicted by current theoretical under-
standing. High-energy colliders enable us to explore the unknown with the potential for 
discoveries beyond our current imagination.
 
5.1.2   –   Ongoing Projects: ATLAS, CMS, LHCb, and HL-LHC
 
The ATLAS  and CMS  experiments at the LHC have explored an enormous amount of 
BSM  parameter space and dramatically changed theoretical perspectives on the most 
pressing questions of high energy physics. The results from these studies have tightly 
constrained minimal models of supersymmetry, while dark matter searches have ruled 
out large chunks of the theoretical WIMP  territory and have set strong constraints on the 
allowed values of the properties of both the dark matter and mediator particles. There 
have been major improvements in sensitivity to new, heavy gauge bosons and new 
fermions with the reach going beyond five times what was achieved prior to the LHC. 
Innovative experimental techniques, propelled by novel theoretical insights, have started 
to explore challenging signatures such as compressed spectra, boosted topologies, and 
long-lived particles. 
In the immediate term, the HL-LHC will expand on this BSM  program with a factor 
of 20 enhancement of the LHC Run 2 luminosity (Recommendation 1a). The reach for 
new, heavy particles will be extended significantly and the HL-LHC will produce approx-
imately 180 million Higgs bosons in each of ATLAS  and CMS , enabling a robust program 
of searches for exotic Higgs decays. Searches for dark matter will further scrutinize ad-
ditional WIMP  parameter space and target hidden sectors and particles interacting more 
feebly than WIMP s.
New detectors, such as picosecond-precision timing detectors, and forward tracking 
and extended trigger systems, will enable searches to better target new physics with 
challenging signatures. Alternative data-taking strategies and novel analysis techniques 
leveraging advances in AI/ML  (for example, anomaly detection) will provide access to 
parameter space that is currently unexplored. 
The LHCb  experiment, despite smaller luminosity and detector coverage, has a unique 
design that covers particles produced at small angles to the beam, which allows it to be 
competitive with the general-purpose detectors for some new particle searches. This is 
particularly true for Higgs decays into long-lived particles, where LHCb  can leverage its 
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel5: Explore New Paradigms in Physics 69
advanced tracking and vertex detection capabilities along with real-time data processing. 
Its upgrade for HL-LHC will allow for significant increase in instantaneous luminosity and 
sensitivity to the hidden sectors (Recommendation 3c).
5.1.3   –    New Initiative: A Portfolio of Agile Projects to Search  
for Direct Evidence of New Particles 
Another strategy to look for long-lived particles at colliders is to construct auxiliary ex-
periments that are placed far away from the primary collision points. Proposed auxiliary 
experiments like CODEX -b and MATHUSLA  can extend the sensitivity to BSM  particle 
lifetimes in Higgs decays by several orders of magnitude. Experiments like FASER2  and 
FORMOSA  at the proposed Forward Physics Facility at CERN  would be sensitive to the 
hidden sectors through the vector and heavy neutral lepton portals. At Fermilab, PIP-II is 
expected to make many more protons than needed for DUNE , and we anticipate propos-
als for experiments using the excess protons. These experiments should compete in the 
portfolio for agile projects (see Recommendation 3a and section 6.2).
 
5.1.4   –   Major Initiative: Higgs Factory
 
Beyond HL-LHC, an electron-positron Higgs factory (Recommendation 2c) will provide 
a very large sample of Higgs bosons with small backgrounds, as well as unique access 
to exotic Higgs decays, which a hadron collider may find challenging to identify. Such a 
machine will provide access to new direct production processes below the Higgs boson 
mass and will have indirect sensitivity to higher energy scales, as described in section 
5.2. Results from searches related to extended Higgs sectors are expected to improve 
upon the HL-LHC results by an order of magnitude, covering a wide range of plausible 
parameter space where a strong electroweak phase transition enabling baryogenesis is 
allowed. Accumulation of large luminosities will enable the exploration of uncharted ter-
ritories in direct searches for feebly coupled light states, such as heavy neutral leptons 
and axion-like particles. Since it will also produce very large numbers of Z bosons, new 
particles will also be searched for in Z-boson decays.
5.1.5   –   20-Year Vision and Future Opportunities
 
The program described in this section consists of a combination of large and small proj-
ects and holds great promise for discovery. By the end of this 20-year period we will have 
ultimate LHC results from the general-purpose experiments and a constellation of agile 
auxiliary experiments. We will also be in the final stages of construction of a Higgs factory 
and will have made progress on the high-field magnets, multi- MW proton driver, wakefield 
accelerator technology, and muon cooling, including operation of several technology tests 
and demonstrators (see sections 6.4 and 6.5). All of this progress will enable us to move 
forward with a 10 TeV pCM collider.
Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle Physics5: Explore New Paradigms in Physics 70
A 10 TeV pCM  collider (muon collider, FCC-hh, or possible wakefield collider) will 
provide the most comprehensive increase in BSM  discovery potential (Recommendation 
4a). Dramatic increases in sensitivity are expected for both model-dependent and model-  
independent searches. Such a collider will be able to reach the thermal WIMP  target for 
minimal WIMP  candidates and hence will play a critical role in providing a definitive test 
for this class of models.
In many cases, the sensitivity for new gauge bosons, fermions, or other resonances 
will be extended by an order of magnitude beyond the HL-LHC. For example, for a universal 
Z′ benchmark scenario, direct searches at a 100 TeV proton collider provide extensive 
coverage up to masses of about 45 TeV for a range of couplings. Furthermore, a 10 TeV 
muon collider can uniquely probe Z′ masses around 100 TeV using indirect effects.
A 10 TeV pCM  collider will provide access to new hidden sectors by producing a 
substantially higher mediator mass or probing even smaller couplings. It will provide op-
portunities to produce new states with masses of order 10 TeV and directly address the 
open question related to the composite nature of the Higgs boson. It can also serve as 
a giga-Higgs factory and provide the ultimate reach for Higgs-like scalars. For example, 
direct searches for an extra scalar at a 10 TeV muon collider, taking advantage of vector 
boson production enhancement, could probe most of the parameter space correspond-
ing to percent level deviations in Higgs couplings, and even explore regions with smaller 
deviations that will be difficult to observe in precision measurements.
Overall, 10 TeV pCM colliders are a unique tool to directly produce and study new 
particles and their properties. Their comprehensive coverage of the BSM parameter space 
enables us to explore the unknown for potential discoveries that may address some of 
the most fundamental questions about the universe.
For example, a muon collider, if technologically achievable and affordable, presents 
a great opportunity to bring a new collider to US soil. A 10 TeV collider fits on the Fermilab 
site and is a good match with Fermilab’s strengths. Its development has synergies with 
the neutrino program beyond DUNE , and the required upgrades to the accelerator com-
plex would also enable fixed target and beam dump experiments to look for new particles 
directly or via their quantum imprints. 
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel
5: Explore New Paradigms in Physics 71
5.2
Pursue Quantum Imprints  
of New Phenomena
5.2.1   –   Science Overview
The direct search for new phenomena in particle physics has often been accomplished by 
going to higher energies with accelerators. This is simply because of Einstein’s famous 
equation E=mc2, which allows for producing heavier particles (large m ) once there is higher 
energy (higher E). Here, c  is the speed of light, a constant of nature that converts the unit 
of mass to energy. This is how new heavy particles have been discovered, and it clearly 
demonstrates new phenomena that lead to new theories, and eventually, new paradigms.
However, in the quantum world, another window for discovery is available. Even 
when new particles are beyond the reach of accelerators, their quantum imprints  can be 
searched for. The quantum effects are fuzzy, and just like quantum bits can be 0 and 1 at 
the same time, particles can exist and not exist at the same time. They are called “virtual” 
particles. But they can leave clear imprints on the behavior of particles we observe.
There is a long history in particle physics of unexpected discoveries through quan -
tum imprints and their theoretical interpretation. The study of radioactive beta decay led 
to the prediction of the neutrino and the properties of the W boson; the explanation of 
Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle Physics5: Explore New Paradigms in Physics 72
matter-antimatter asymmetry in kaons led to the prediction of the third quark family; the 
observation of neutral current weak interaction events in neutrino scattering resulted in 
the indirect discovery of the Z boson; measurements of B meson mixing predicted the 
high mass of the top quark. The characteristics of the observed quantum imprints often 
led to the definition of the accelerators required to directly produce the relevant new 
particles successfully. 
Before the Higgs particle was discovered by the LHC, its mass had been constrained 
around the actual measured value from precision measurements of the top quark and the 
W boson. Measurements of the decays of the Higgs boson already rule out the existence 
of a fourth generation of particles that follow the same template as the known three.
The physics of flavor is particularly sensitive to quantum imprints of particles that 
are not present in either the initial or the final state of interactions. The existence of three 
families of elementary particles of matter and their mass and mixing patterns are a key 
feature, and a puzzle, in the Standard Model. Rare quark flavor transitions have unpar-
alleled sensitivity to the existence of new physics many orders of magnitude beyond the 
reach of direct searches in current and planned energy frontier accelerators. 
For electrons, muons, and tau leptons, Standard Model mixing is so rare that any 
observation of a flavor-changing signal called charged lepton flavor violation in any current 
or planned experiment would be an important discovery and an unambiguous signature 
of new physics. Collider experiments can search for subtle effects that would be caused 
by particles with masses much too heavy to be produced directly.
A discovery made by any current or planned experiments would indicate specific di-
rections in which to focus subsequent experiments to directly observe the underlying new 
physics and potentially suggest the new energy scale to be probed. Progress necessitates 
clean theoretical predictions and high precision experiments with huge data samples and 
excellent control of systematic uncertainties. Theoretical and experimental progress go 
hand in hand, with advances in one side motivating further activity and progress in the 
other side, in a continuous synergistic interplay.
Currently several intriguing experimental deviations from theoretical Standard Model 
predictions have been observed. The most significant of these anomalies are related to 
g-2, the magnetic moment of the muon, which appears larger than anticipated; decays 
of the bottom quark to a strange quark and a pair of charged leptons, which may be less 
frequent than expected; and a possibility that bottom quark decays to tau leptons and 
muons do not have the same strength, pointing to lepton flavor universality violation. All 
these anomalies might be resolved by improved experimental precision or theoretical 
predictions. They also might be the first signs of new discoveries.
5.2. 2   –    Ongoing Projects: Mu2e, Belle II, LHCb,  
ATLAS, and CMS
The largest US experimental efforts currently dedicated to indirect probes of new phys-
ics are the Mu2e  charged lepton flavor violation experiment, hosted by Fermilab, and 
the Belle -II and LHCb  programs, hosted by KEK in Japan and CERN , respectively. These 
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel5: Explore New Paradigms in Physics 73
programs will continue over the time frame of this report with alternating periods of data 
taking and upgrades (Recommendation 1). The other HL-LHC experiments also present 
many opportunities for indirect searches, as will experiments at future colliders.
Mu2e , which searches for the conversion of a muon captured by a nucleus into an 
electron with no emitted neutrinos, will extend our sensitivity to charged lepton flavor 
violation in this sector by a remarkable four orders of magnitude. Our access to new 
muon-electron-quark interactions will increase by an order of magnitude in energy scale, 
up to 104 TeV. Any observed signal at Mu2e  would indicate new physics and should be 
followed up by further experiments for its full characterization.
The Belle -II and LHCb  programs focus on decays of bottom and charm quarks and of 
tau leptons. The clean, controlled environment of electron-positron collisions (for Belle -II) 
and the extremely high rates and broad-spectrum production in proton-proton collisions 
(for LHCb ) make the two experiments complementary in many ways. These experiments 
will further probe, with unprecedented precision, Standard Model predictions for quark 
behavior and lepton physics including leptoquark searches and flavor changing neutral 
currents, and will conduct wide hidden-sector searches. They will reduce the experimen-
tal uncertainties in the measurements in tension with the Standard Model by an order of 
magnitude or more and introduce qualitatively new tests made possible by the extremely 
large number of particle decays available for study. The experiments will continue the 
established program of searches for potential new signs of unexpected matter-antimatter 
differences, and of measurements that overconstrain and challenge Standard Model pa-
rameters to search for inconsistencies between different processes.
The quantum imprints of particles too heavy to be produced in significant rates at the 
LHC can still result in observable departures from the predictions of the Standard Model. 
ATLAS  and CMS  at LHC currently have the unique capability of studying the interactions 
of directly produced top quarks, Higgs bosons, and W and Z bosons. The data from the 
ATLAS  and CMS  experiments, in conjunction with other results, are being used to assem-
ble a comprehensive picture of potential deviations from the Standard Model caused by 
massive new particles in a largely model-independent manner. The sensitivity of HL-LHC 
for certain new physics models can reach scales as high as 20 TeV. These measurements 
complement those at lower energies to provide a comprehensive view of the possible 
existence of new particles.
5.2.3   –   New Initiatives: Belle II and LHCb upgrades
The upgraded Belle  II experiment will record 25 times more electron-positron collisions by 
2035  at the SuperKEKB  accelerator at KEK in Japan than Belle  did previously. The facility 
produces world-record luminosity using the most advanced nano-size beams. The unique 
environment of the SuperKEKB  offers access to decays with multiple undetected particles 
in the final state, such as hadron and tau decays that produce more than one neutrino. 
The experiment will also further constrain hadronic vacuum polarization, which is import-
ant for the precise comparison of theoretical and experimental results on the muon g-2. 
Quark mixing parameters will be measured with ultimate precision (Recommendation 3c).
Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle Physics5: Explore New Paradigms in Physics 74
The US community has extensive experience with this science at the BaBar  experiment 
at the SLAC  National Accelerator Laboratory from the early 2000 s, as well as participation 
in the original Belle  experiment, and has a lot to contribute to the operation of the detector 
and analyses of data. 
To achieve such an unprecedentedly powerful beam, there are many challenges in 
the accelerator. A major technological challenge is producing a nanobeam, namely the 
ability to focus the beam down to the nanometer scale just before collisions. Another is to 
maintain a very high degree of vacuum in the beam pipe, as a small amount of residual 
gas can interact with the beam and cause problems. Finally, the intense beams can also 
cause a high level of background at the collision point that needs to be mitigated. These 
technologies are important for all future electron-positron colliders, and therefore it is 
crucial that the US is involved in their development for the future of the field.
LHCb  after its second upgrade will produce huge B hadron samples and will reach 
unprecedented precision in a large number of observables in the time period from 2035  
to 2041, or earlier. The scientists in the LHCb  collaboration will explore extremely rare 
flavor processes, including matter-antimatter asymmetries in the charm sector, and will 
also search for and study hidden-sector particles, anomalous B meson decays, and more. 
LHCb  upgrade II will be a major project that opens a new era of precision in the rare phe-
nomena explored by the experiment (Recommendation 3c). 
The LHCb  experiment, together with BaBar , Belle , and Belle  II, has also produced a 
new type of matter composed of quarks. It has been known that most matter around us 
is either made of three quarks, such as protons and neutrons (collectively called bary-
ons), or of a quark and an antiquark, such as pions and kaons (called mesons). However, 
these experiments discovered a type of matter made of two quarks and two antiquarks 
(tetraquarks) or four quarks and an antiquark (pentaquarks). The study of these exotic 
particles helps us understand the forces that bind quarks together. Such novel states of 
matter are of strong interest not only in particle physics but also in nuclear physics and 
might also exist at the interior of very dense stars such as neutron stars. 
These experiments also produce large samples of tau particles. In addition to charged 
lepton flavor violation searches at Mu2e  from muon decays, they can search for the same 
violation in tau decays, a complementary probe to quantum imprints of particles well be-
yond the reach of current collider experiments.
All experiments mentioned here are major international projects with small but im -
portant US contributions and demonstrate the good investment value of international 
engagements.
5.2.4   –   Major Initiative: Higgs Factory
One of our recommendations for major initiatives is the US involvement in a Higgs  
factory (Recommendation 2c). The main purpose of the factory is to reveal the secrets 
of the Higgs boson (section 3.2). However, the Higgs boson is also a sensitive probe of 
the quantum imprints of new phenomena. For instance, it is possible that there is more 
than one type of Higgs boson, and the discovered particle is only the first one in a new 
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel5: Explore New Paradigms in Physics 75
family. Even when the additional Higgs bosons are well beyond the reach of HL-LHC, 
their existence affects the interaction of the first one with various particles. Another pos-
sibility is that the Higgs boson is not an elementary particle but is a composite consisting 
of smaller constituents, and has a non-zero size. Both these cases can be inferred from 
precise measurements of the Higgs couplings. 
The Higgs factory we recommend can be run at the Z pole. Its high luminosity could 
produce of the order of 109–1012 Z bosons and a large sample of WW events. These 
abilities would enable an exceptional program of precision studies of electroweak in-
teractions, extending the probed energy scale by a factor of 3–10 beyond the HL-LHC. 
In fact, a similar program was conducted at the Large Electron Positron Collider ( LEP) 
and the Stanford Linear Collider ( SLC) in the 1990 s that resulted in the prediction of 
masses of the top quark and the Higgs boson, the exclusion of a fourth family of light 
neutrinos, and other important results without ever reaching the relevant energy scales. 
With a much bigger sample of Z and W bosons, we will obtain an unprecedented reach 
to quantum imprints of new phenomena. A successful Z pole program will involve chal-
lenging, high-collision-rate environments that will necessitate advances in accelerator 
and detector design, as well as imposing computing requirements an order of magnitude 
beyond those of the HL-LHC.
In addition, the Z bosons would then produce large samples of bottom and charm 
hadrons and tau leptons in their decays, and at the 1012 Z boson scale these will be-
come extremely useful for studying their properties. For example, the FCC-ee circular 
collider is expected to produce a sample of bottom mesons 20 times larger than that 
of Belle -II, enabling a strong indirect search program that will complement its Higgs 
boson and electroweak parameter measurements. That search program is unfeasible 
at LHCb -II or Belle  II.
Precision measurement of the top quark mass is an indirect measure of its interaction 
with the Higgs boson, which controls the quantum mechanical evolution of the Standard 
Model at high energies; a 350 GeV Higgs factory stage will reduce the uncertainty in this 
crucial parameter by a factor of 10. Comparing the direct measurements of the top quark 
and Higgs boson masses at a Higgs factory to the precision measurements of Z and W 
boson properties can reveal hidden quantum imprints of new particles and phenomena 
at 10 TeV energy scale.
5.2.4   –   20-Year Vision and Future Opportunities
The intense proton beams provided by the Fermilab accelerator complex have the poten-
tial to further extend searches for quantum imprints of new phenomena. There is ongoing 
discussion of an advanced muon facility using the beams of the PIP-II accelerator currently 
under construction. We encourage further development of this concept, which would in-
crease sensitivity to multiple possible charged lepton flavor violation processes by about 
a factor of 100 (Recommendation 4e).
The possible future replacement of the Fermilab booster with a new accelerator pro-
ducing higher intensity proton beams can support a comprehensive facility for experiments 
Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle Physics5: Explore New Paradigms in Physics 76
on flavor physics, searches for extremely rare phenomena, and CP violation. With careful 
planning the new accelerator can also become a key enabler for future neutrino experi-
ments and/or a muon collider, in line with the long-term vision of our report.
 77
 6
Investing in  
the Future  
of Science and 
T echnology
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel
Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle Physics6: Investing in the Future of Science and Technology 78
Flagship projects often start as ideas on a blackboard. Future 
innovations require that the entire lifecycle of scientific discovery 
be supported, from initial concept to construction, operations, and 
data analysis. R&D is critical at multiple stages along the way.
To promote robust R&D efforts across a range of enabling technologies, we recommend 
sustained investments in key areas essential to the future of particle physics: theory, 
an agile project program, detector instrumentation, particle accelerators, collider R&D, 
facilities and infrastructure, software and computing, and data science. We also discuss 
the ways that particle physics leads to technology innovations for society and make rec-
ommendations for a more sustainable future for the field. Note that collider R&D includes 
both accelerator and detector R&D targeting specific future colliders.
6.1
Theory
 
Particle physics theory lies at the heart of our understanding of the universe at both the 
smallest and largest scales. Theory plays an essential role in guiding which new ex-
periments should be pursued, informing experimental design, interpreting experimental 
measurements and observations, and exploring uncharted regimes.
Theoretical developments have far-reaching implications and connect particle phys-
ics to other areas of science, including nuclear physics; astrophysics; condensed matter 
physics; and atomic, molecular, and optical physics. In addition, theoretical work closely 
connects physicists with mathematics and computer science. Theoretical insights also 
incorporate new perspectives, from quantum information to AI/ML , that propel innovative 
experimental techniques.
Theorists have opened new avenues of research and proposed new experiments; for 
example, theoretical investigations into possible hidden sectors led directly to the portfolio 
of DMNI  projects. Theorists support the experimental portfolio of particle physics, provid-
ing the predictions necessary to analyze, interpret, and understand experimental results. 
Examples of theoretical calculations underpinning the extraction of physical quantities 
from experimental data are neutrino-nucleus interactions for DUNE , particle collisions at 
the LHC, and the detailed structure of the CMB  power spectra for CMB -S4.
Theorists uncover the mathematical patterns that describe the universe and explore 
alternate mathematical universes to deepen our understanding of nature. Theoretical 
investigations into quantum gravity and the mysteries of black holes have unlocked con-
nections between extreme space-time geometries and information theory. The perspectives 
theorists bring to particle physics are important in inspiring young scientists.
Computational physics is a vital component of particle theory. Powerful computers 
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel6: Investing in the Future of Science and Technology 79
simulate the behavior of fundamental particles of the Standard Model, enabling mean-
ingful comparisons between theoretical expectations and experimental measurements. 
For example, computational simulations of the strong nuclear force have been critical to 
precision tests of the Standard Model at the LHC and other colliders; they provide new 
insight into the origin of matter in the early universe. Theoretical techniques are also used 
to create “digital twins” of the universe to test different scenarios for cosmic evolution.
Maximizing the physics reach of experiments relies on the collective effort of the 
particle physics community, encompassing theoretical and computational research. Main-
taining a balanced program, with healthy support for theoretical research, will magnify 
the impact of the entire field and enable future discoveries.
Universities are home to the vast majority of theoretical research and nearly all stu-
dent training, so it is critical that university support be strengthened to ensure equitable 
access to particle physics. The level of support for theoretical research has eroded over 
the past decade. The cuts were primarily absorbed by universities, to the detriment of 
the field. To catalyze tomorrow’s theoretical breakthroughs and to retain the best talent, 
this trend needs to be reversed. Increasing support (Recommendation 4b) will enable 
particle physics to thrive in a robust manner, bring diverse perspectives, strengthen talent 
identification, and create a more inclusive and effective workforce.
Area Recommendation 1: Increase DOE HEP-funded university-based theory 
research by $15 million per year in 2023  dollars (or about 30% of the theory 
program), to propel innovation and ensure international competitiveness. Such 
an increase would bring theory support back to 2010 levels. Maintain DOE lab-
based theory groups as an essential component of the theory community.
6.2
Advancing Science and T echnology 
through Agile Experiments (ASTAE)
Experiments at multiple scales in cost, size, and duration are critical to unlocking the 
mysteries of the universe. We recommend DOE create a portfolio of experiments that are 
small in scale and quick to execute, yet significant in their impact. This complements the 
Mid-Scale Research Infrastructure ( MSRI ) program, both within the Division of Physics 
and across NSF. It enables DOE  to strategically target emerging opportunities within its 
program while supporting the overall DOE  mission. The program for these agile DOE  
experiments is ASTAE , which is Latin for “javelins,” reflecting the experiments’ focused 
nature. Across particle physics there are important experiments that meet these crite-
ria, experiments capable of bringing forward discovery science, advancing technology,  
developing a workforce, and furthering US leadership. 
Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle Physics6: Investing in the Future of Science and Technology 80
These experiments are key to paradigm-shifting discoveries, both in their own right 
and as incubators for new technologies and physics directions. The recent DOE -HEP 
DMNI  program exemplifies the opportunity for discovery that small-scale experiments can 
provide, while incubating key quantum technologies. Similarly, the recent first observa-
tion of coherent elastic neutrino-nucleus scattering ( CEvNS ) demonstrates the potential 
for discovery science for experiments of this scale. In addition to discovery science, this 
proposed portfolio can enable small-scale supporting experiments that simplify the inter-
pretation of data from flagship measurements. They can also act as critical demonstrators 
for innovative instrumentation that will enable the next generation of experiments. 
ASTAE  will provide an essential training ground for a workforce capable of innovation 
and leadership to sustain the vitality of the field. These experiments train the full HEP 
workforce (students, postdoctoral fellows, scientists, engineers, technicians, and project 
managers) in the complete life-cycle of an experiment: design, construction, commis-
sioning, operations, and the publication of the results. The ASTAE  portfolio will provide 
the hands-on experience needed to conceive the technological breakthroughs that will 
enable the scientific discoveries of the future and foster scientific ingenuity among the 
next generation of researchers. 
Over time, this portfolio should maintain a balance of experiments across the sci-
ence driver focus areas. The possibility of projects that push beyond these focus areas 
should be left open for compelling scientific or technological cases. The projects should 
be reviewed for their potential for discovery, technology innovation, and ability to provide 
critical inputs to the success of the greater HEP mission. 
Area Recommendation 2: For the ASTAE  program to be agile, we recommend 
a broad, predictable, recurring, and preferably annual call for proposals. This 
ensures the flexibility to target emerging opportunities and fields. A program 
on the scale of $35 million per year in 2023  dollars is needed to ensure a 
healthy pipeline of projects. 
Area Recommendation 3: To preserve the agility of the ASTAE  program, project 
management requirements should be outlined for the portfolio and should be 
adjusted to be commensurate with the scale of the experiment. 
Area Recommendation 4: A successful ASTAE  experiment involves 3 phases: 
design, construction, and operations. A design phase proposal should precede 
a construction proposal, and construction proposals are considered from proj-
ects within the group that have successfully completed their design phase. 
Area Recommendation 5: The DMNI  projects that have successfully completed 
their design phase and are ready to be reviewed for construction should form 
the first set of construction proposals for ASTAE . The corresponding design 
phase call would be open to proposals from all areas of particle physics.
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel6: Investing in the Future of Science and Technology 81
6.3
Detector Instrumentation 
The field of particle physics is at an exciting juncture where current detector instrumentation 
technologies have pushed the boundaries of sensitivity and scalability. Whereas modest 
advancements in some cases can pave the way for the next generation of experiments, 
numerous research areas eagerly await new approaches, innovative materials, and 
cutting-edge technologies to overcome existing technological challenges. A vital particle 
physics program requires a balance of investments in both evolutionary and transforma-
tional “blue sky” detector development to achieve paradigm-shifting ideas. Many of the 
R&D needs for the next decade and beyond are outlined in the report DOE Basic Research 
Needs for High Energy Physics—Detector Research and Development.These advances 
can be achieved if we support careers in instrumentation, including research scientists 
at universities who can support local detector innovation, provide continuity, and educate 
the next generation of experts (Recommendations 4d and 5d).
Purely instrumentation-based and interdisciplinary graduate programs should be 
empowered, and the lateral move of scientists between universities and laboratories, 
including joint positions, should be made easier. Career paths and recognition in detector 
instrumentation should be extended to all scientists, including chemists, material scien-
tists, engineers, and technicians. Cross-disciplinary opportunities of collaboration and 
fertilization at universities and laboratories are essential.
The particle physics community has identified the need for stronger coordination 
between the different groups carrying out detector R&D in the US. We strongly support 
the R&D collaborations ( RDC s) that are being established and will be stewarded by the 
Coordinating Panel for Advanced Detectors, overseen by the APS Division of Particles 
and Fields. The RDC s are organized along specific technology directions or common 
challenges and aim to define and follow roadmaps to achieve specific R&D goals. This 
coordination will help to achieve a more coherent detector instrumentation program in the 
US and will help to avoid duplication while addressing common challenges. International 
collaboration is also crucial, especially in cases where we want to have technological 
leadership roles. Involvement in the newly established detector R&D groups at CERN  is 
encouraged, as are contributions to the design and planning for the next generation of 
international or global projects. Targeted future collider detector R&D, such as for Higgs 
factories or a muon collider, is covered in section 6.5.
To enable groundbreaking detector innovation and US leadership in this field, we 
need to invest in a coherent set of modernized facilities with enhanced capabilities. These 
include test beam and irradiation facilities with beam properties and intensities appropriate 
for future experimental demands, low-background and underground facilities, cleanroom 
space, access to nano-fabrication facilities, and microelectronics foundries. 
6: Investing in the Future of Science and Technology 82
To stimulate transformational breakthroughs, we need to pursue synergies with other  
disciplines outside of particle physics, as well as close collaborations with industry.  
Recent examples of this are quantum sensors and microelectronics, where communication 
and exchange between particle physics and other communities led to enhanced funding 
for technology development and the addition of external experts to the particle physics 
community. Over the past few years this collaboration has led to the development of a new 
suite of detector technologies and methods; these in turn have established a new set of 
small-scale experiments that enhance the particle physics portfolio.
The use of quantum sensors in particle physics experiments has grown extensively, 
and the developments within particle physics have benefitted communications, com-
puting, and many other areas. Quantum sensors have been used in searches for dark 
matter, fifth forces, dark photons, permanent electric dipole moment ( EDM ), variations in 
fundamental constants, and gravitational waves, among others, and they come in a wide 
range of technologies: atom interferometers and atomic clocks, magnetometers, quantum 
calorimeters and superconducting sensors. Quantum sensors are being deployed in all 
areas of particle physics. To further advance these technologies, we need to continue 
strong support for a broad range of quantum sensors.
Much of the growth in quantum sensors over the past decade has occurred in small, 
laboratory-based experiments. Support for such experiments should continue as a way to 
rapidly develop sensor technologies and help determine the areas where quantum sen-
sors can have the greatest impact. Several recent developments have reached the point 
where plans for larger-scale, longer-term experiments can and should be conceptualized. 
These concepts can evaluate the potential reach that can be achieved in a larger effort 
and the scale of required technological development. Here, potential reach is meant in 
terms of our physics goals: enhanced sensitivities to the phenomena we are trying to 
measure compared to traditional non-quantum technologies. We recommend mechanisms 
to support interactions outside the particle physics program to enable collaborations with 
experts in other fields who have experience with quantum sensors, including QIS theory. 
In microelectronics, particle physics specializes in extreme environments such as 
high radiation, ultra-high vacuum, and cryogenic operations. These areas have been 
spearheaded by the particle physics community over the past several years and show 
benefits to fields outside particle physics, such as nuclear physics, space exploration, 
nonproliferation, and homeland security.
Related innovations and proof of concepts from within particle physics are benefitting 
the microelectronics industry, with specialized cryogenic and energy-efficient designs and 
integration techniques being adopted by industry. In addition, the facilities established at 
the national laboratories are of growing interest to commercial partners. Close collabora-
tion between particle physics microelectronics experts and CAD tool companies is needed 
to provide feedback on novel applications of needed advanced tools. Close collaboration 
between microelectronics teams at the national laboratories and engineers and scientists at 
universities helps cultivate talent to advance the workforce for the microelectronics industry.
Particle physics benefits from developments in other fields; for example, atomic 
clocks developed decades ago for precision timing standards are now being proposed for 
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel6: Investing in the Future of Science and Technology 83
the search for variations of fundamental constants and gravitational waves. We should 
strive to collaborate with other scientific communities to maximize mutual benefits, such 
as gaining access to new sensor technologies or providing access to our development 
of large magnets, vacuum systems, and superconducting radio-frequency cavities for 
outside fields. To facilitate this exchange, we need to move beyond traditional funding 
boundaries and allow scientists and engineers working with quantum sensors, whatever 
their specific field, to tackle the most interesting and challenging problems. Focused 
support for the development of quantum materials, including theoretical explorations, 
should be provided.
Workforce development is needed to encourage workers with the needed skills to 
engage with particle physics and stay in the field for our long-term success in the face 
of increasing competition from industrial quantum computing. The particle physics com-
munity needs to invest now to train and retain the next generation of quantum scientists. 
Area Recommendation 6: Increase the yearly budget for generic Detector R&D 
by $20 million in 2023  dollars. This should be supplemented by additional funds 
for the collider R&D program.
Area Recommendation 7: The detector R&D program should continue to leverage 
national initiatives such as QIS, microelectronics, and AI/ML .
6.4
Particle Accelerators and R&D 
Particle accelerators play an essential role in high energy physics research. They deliver 
the unique beams that enable the majority of the P5 science drivers for the next decade 
(section 6.4.1). Physics goals beyond this decade place radical new demands on acceler-
ator capabilities. To achieve these demanding performance requirements while reducing 
costs and minimizing environmental impacts requires focused investment in generic R&D 
(section 6.4.2) and collider R&D (section 6.5) along with strategic investment in the existing 
accelerator complex at Fermilab (section 6.6.2). In this context, DOE -HEP, in partnership 
with NSF and other offices and agencies, has the opportunity to lead accelerator devel-
opment into the future while simultaneously delivering broader benefits across science 
and society. 
Particle accelerators rely on a broad suite of technologies. This starts with the source 
that injects particles into the accelerator. When the particles involved are rare or unstable, 
or the required intensities are very high, these injector systems require significant tech -
nology development. At the highest intensities and brightness, techniques to increase the 
density (in energy and space) of particles in the beams—for example, beam cooling—must 
often be applied. The particles must be accelerated to the required energy, typically with 
6: Investing in the Future of Science and Technology 84
metallic radio-frequency structures, dielectric structures, or, most recently, plasma-based 
wakefields. Particle accelerators generally utilize advanced magnets to guide and focus the 
beams. At the highest energies, manipulating particle beams often requires very-high-field 
magnets that rely on developing technologies such as high-temperature superconductors. 
The resulting beams are directed to an experimental target or brought into collisions with 
another beam inside a collider detector. To manage and understand the behavior of the 
beams in each of these subsystems, sophisticated beam physics theory and computation, 
as well as dedicated instrumentation and control systems are required. 
High-energy colliders represent perhaps the most formidable and extensive inte-
gration of particle accelerator technology. The challenge comes not only in achieving 
the requisite beam parameters, but in managing the complex interactions between the 
multiple systems that make up the machine. Incorporating the results of technology R&D 
to meet these challenges drives the need for sustained investment in the R&D and de-
sign of future colliders. Validation of collider designs through simulations, practical tests 
of individual design elements, and ultimately demonstrator facilities that test integrated 
segments of the design are essential steps toward transforming the results of R&D into 
realistic prospects for the future. 
It is vital to build on the investments of the past while also developing innovative solu-
tions for the future. Fermilab, which currently supports a strong neutrino and muon flavor 
physics program with its proton accelerator complex, represents one of those investments. 
In the near term, upgrades to that complex will allow Fermilab to deliver high-power, 
high-intensity neutrino beams to DUNE . Developing a path for the evolution of the Fermilab 
accelerator complex beyond that goal supports a multi-decadal vision for Fermilab as a 
world-leading facility and lays the foundation for a 20-plus-year vision for particle physics.
6.4.1   –   Particle Physics Accelerator Roadmap
Major advances in accelerator design are central to realizing some of our most ambitious 
scientific goals. The vision laid out in this report foresees decision points on the 5-, 10- and 
20-year timescales where accelerator technology choices will need to be made. Informed 
decisions at each of these junctures will not be possible without a robust and responsive 
R&D program to deliver crucial but as yet unknown information about the capabilities, 
cost, and risks of promising technologies. While it will take time to assemble the teams 
required to inform these decisions, it is imperative that this R&D is pursued aggressively 
if we hope to act on our most ambitious goal of initiating a 10 TeV pCM collider shortly 
after the conclusion of the HL-LHC program. 
Accelerator design is strongly influenced by the type of particle being accelerated. 
Electron (and positron) accelerators are constrained by the fact that beams of these very 
light leptons quickly lose energy to synchrotron radiation, which must be accommodated 
in the accelerator design. This has limited the energies of practical electron-positron 
circular machines to a fraction of a TeV. Linear accelerator designs aim towards the TeV 
beam energy scale or, using wakefield acceleration methods, potentially reach beyond 
it. Synchrotron radiation is strongly suppressed for heavier particles such as muons and 
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel6: Investing in the Future of Science and Technology 85
protons, so very high energies can be achieved with circular accelerators. In the case of 
muons, the short lifetime of the particle means that the acceleration process must occur 
very rapidly. 
Non-collider experiments in domains such as neutrino and flavor physics also benefit 
from ongoing R&D to deliver beams with increased intensity and specialized beam for-
matting, while carefully managing the beam physics that drives the onset of instabilities 
and loss of performance. 
We anticipate that a concrete plan to build an offshore Higgs factory will take shape 
on roughly a five-year timescale. There are reasonably mature linear collider and circu-
lar collider designs that can achieve our science goals. These designs are still utilizing 
R&D to further optimize and reduce risk in the designs. The US accelerator community is 
well-positioned to engage in this final pre-project stage of R&D to ensure a cost-effective 
machine that meets all performance requirements.
Beyond the Higgs factory, the physics landscape that has shaped the science drivers 
points to still higher energy scales, the 10 or more TeV pCM scale. Three technological 
approaches are under development that have the potential to enable physics explora -
tion at this scale. They are a proton-proton collider based on very-high-field magnets, a 
muon collider, and possibly a linear collider based on advanced wakefield technology. 
All three of these technologies have different appealing features and must be developed 
further. To make a confident, informed decision on the path forward—a decision that we 
hope to make within the next 20 years—one or more of these technologies must reach 
technical maturity, allowing us to reliably estimate both cost and technical risk. Reaching 
that point is only possible with strategic, intensive, and focused development of both the 
foundational technologies and the resulting collider designs. 
The proposal for an affordable proton-proton machine rests on a very plausible ex-
trapolation of the parameters for the proton beams. However, that design requires magnet 
technology that is currently beyond the state of the art. A multi-decade, international R&D 
program is essential to produce magnets meeting the necessary specifications. The US 
is actively engaged in this effort through the US Magnet Development Program. 
In the case of the muon collider, concepts and preliminary specifications exist for 
each of the required subsystems of the collider complex. That complex would be most 
readily built on an existing proton accelerator complex. Fermilab in the US emerges as 
a premier candidate for such a facility (section 6.6.2). A muon collider baseline design 
that will support a detailed cost estimate is in preparation. Significant system R&D —for 
example, developing the prototype cryomodules that integrate the high-field magnets and 
radio-frequency accelerating cavities for the muon cooling system—along with engineering 
design work before the end of the decade would produce a fully costed conceptual design 
for a demonstrator facility, which a future panel can consider for construction. 
Wakefield concepts for a collider are in the early stages of development. A critical 
next step is the delivery of an end-to-end design concept, including cost scales, with 
self-consistent parameters throughout. This will provide an important yardstick against 
which to measure progress along this emerging technology path.
In addition to developing the technologies and expertise to build future colliders, 
6: Investing in the Future of Science and Technology 86
maintaining US expertise in their operation and optimization is crucial. Engagement 
with the LHC and its high-luminosity upgrade at the energy frontier, with SuperKEKB  for 
flavor physics, and with the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider ( RHIC ) and its successor, the 
Electron-Ion Collider ( EIC), for nuclear physics can provide key pathways to maintaining 
a vibrant US accelerator and collider workforce.
The US accelerator program stewards not only accelerator technology but also the 
workforce that adapts that technology to particle physics science goals. The R&D efforts 
outlined in the following sections will inform our future decisions and should not be de-
ferred. Acting now capitalizes on the current energy and enthusiasm of the community 
and maintains and motivates the necessary workforce. These are essential to effective 
US participation in a Higgs factory and they maximize the likelihood of realizing a 10 TeV 
pCM collider within a realistic timeframe.
6.4.2   –   Particle Accelerator R&D
 
Accelerator R&D drives the innovation required to meet the increasing demands of particle 
physics on accelerator capacity, performance, and cost. These demands span improving 
the performance of operating accelerators such as the Fermilab Accelerator Complex 
(section 6.6.2), advancing the technologies to deliver a Higgs factory, and developing the 
designs and technologies needed for colliders capable of exploring the 10 TeV pCM scale 
(section 6.5). Development for muon, proton, and advanced accelerators and supercon-
ducting magnets will support collider R&D and drive recruiting and workforce development.
Over the last decade, sustained R&D has created capabilities that are driving this 
decade’s research (Recommendations 1a and 1b). The HL-LHC upgrade leveraged ge-
neric accelerator R&D to produce Nb3Sn  conductor and cable, which were utilized by 
the targeted LHC Accelerator Research Program ( LARP ) to deliver high-field magnet 
prototypes. The Proton Improvement Plan-II ( PIP-II) project is in progress to provide high 
intensity beams to DUNE  and other experiments based on state-of-the-art superconducting 
radio-frequency ( RF) cavities. 
The US accelerator R&D program has also made substantial progress in the past 
decade that affects the future design and development of a Higgs factory and of high 
intensity accelerators for neutrino and flavor physics. For example, in collaboration with 
international partners, the US program has set new records in normal and superconduct-
ing RF gradients, in the context of an ILC module. Tests of integrable optics and optical 
stochastic cooling demonstrated key steps toward the future of intense beams. High-  
intensity beam experiments also validated new accelerator target materials.
At the same time, advances in R&D now allow us to consider technology paths that can 
enable scientific discovery at the 10 TeV pCM scale (Recommendation 4a). New magnetic field 
records were set toward the needs for FCC-hh and muon colliders. Tests also demonstrated 
muon cooling and thus enabled a new international design effort in which US participation 
is essential. High-gradient plasma-wakefield-based advanced accelerators demonstrated 
advances toward future colliders including 8 GeV energy gain over just 20 cm (approximately 
a thousandth of the distance conventionally required) and positron acceleration.
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel6: Investing in the Future of Science and Technology 87
Advances in accelerator R&D have a profound effect on both particle physics and 
a range of other disciplines. Accelerator structures developed for the ILC enable a new 
generation of light sources important to basic energy science ( BES), including the Linac 
Coherent Light Source- II (LCLS -II) and the high-energy LCLS -II-HE. The Cryomodule 
Test Facility and associated test stands support both the LCLS -II (BES) and PIP-II (HEP) 
accelerator projects. Investments in high-field magnets by the DOE Magnet Development 
Program and NSF’s MagLab  have advanced the state of the art in conductors and magnet 
design to the benefit of particle physics, materials science, fusion energy research, and 
commercial development.
Broad generic R&D with a long-term focus is critical to extending the reach of ac-
celerators to meet future physics needs. Technical breakthroughs are required to enable 
accelerators to meet the field’s science drivers, to push costs lower than estimates based 
on current technology, and to reduce environmental impact. There are exciting opportu-
nities in the development of (i) new high average power and efficient drivers ( RF, lasers, 
and electron beams); (ii) accelerating structures that can sustain high average power and 
gradient (metallic, plasma and dielectric); (iii) high-temperature superconducting magnets; 
and (iv) computing, instrumentation, and controls. Normal conducting radio frequency 
(RF), superconducting RF, superconducting magnets, targets, and advanced acceleration 
concepts are essential to develop the next generation of accelerators for particle phys-
ics. The normal conducting RF program should incorporate innovative concepts such as 
cryogenic cool copper and distributed coupling. Accelerator and beam physics research 
is also critical, including large-scale computation as machines become more complex. 
Superconducting high field magnet R&D is essential to future proton ( FCC-hh) and muon 
collider options; timely execution of magnet R&D  would leverage expertise becoming 
available with the completion of the HL-LHC Accelerator Upgrade Project.
Stronger investment in accelerator R&D is needed across the program (Recommen-
dation 4c). The DOE  HEP GARD  program sponsors crucial work at both laboratories and 
universities across the program areas.
Area Recommendation 8: Increase annual funding to the General Accelerator 
R&D program by $10M  in 2023  dollars to ensure US leadership in key areas.
Test facilities are ever more important to develop the advanced technology for future 
machines (Recommendations 4a and 4c). The need is magnified by the small number of 
training opportunities on operating machines and the significant timescales and technical 
demands of the next colliders. Use of the existing test facilities should be maximized. 
The development of high-intensity beams, supported by proton and superconducting 
RF accelerators, can be pursued using FAST  and IOTA  at Fermilab. Key acceleration 
and beam requirements of a stage for a future collider based on wakefield technology, 
including energy gain with high brightness beams at high efficiency, can be developed 
using FACET -II at SLAC , BELLA  at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory ( LBNL ), AWA  at 
Argonne National Laboratory ( ANL), ATF at Brookhaven National Laboratory ( BNL), ZEUS  
at the University of Michigan under NSF, and other facilities. In addition to demonstrating 
6: Investing in the Future of Science and Technology  88
a single self-contained stage, some of these facilities, particularly BELL A and potentially 
ZEUS, can demonstrate th e next step  toward a pla sma wakefiel d collider — operation wi th 
two linked stages.
Future test facili ties would typically be mid-scale projects. Technical and sci entific 
plans should be develo ped for test facility projec ts that could be launched within  the next 
5 –10 years. These could include the second stage cool cop per test, which could develop 
high-gradient normal conducting RF technology. Advanced  accelerator test facilities can 
explore technology and concepts t hat could signif icantly reduce cost and risks as sociated 
with a 10 TeV pCM collider.
An upgrade for FACET -II e+ is uniquely positioned to enable study of positron accel-
eration in high-gradient plasmas. New k W-class efficient lasers,  and use of their kilohertz 
repetition rate for a ctive feedback  at kBELLA,  will advance stage pe rformance and ena ble 
beam tests. An AWA up grade woul d support GeV advanced structures. These, togeth-
er with muon  collider devel opmen t, will advance the technology and feed into a future 
demonstrator facility to make possible a 10 TeV pCM collider (see section 6.5). Ma ny of 
these projects may be ready for scientific , technical, and cost reviews within the contex t 
of the HEP program toward the middle to end of t his decade (Recommendation 6).
Area Recommendation 9: Support generic accelerator R&D with the construc-
tion of small-scale test facilities. Initiate construction of larger test facil ities 
based on project review and informed by the collider R&D program.
Robust growth in the f ield requires s trengthened invest ment in educatio n, training, and 
retention to rene w the workforce a nd develop expertise in accelerator di sciplines. A 
strong and creative workforc e is necessary to develop and b uild new accelerators and 
colliders. Creating such a workforce  is driven b y state-of-th e-art R&D that a ttracts high -
level talent that can execute the machine design, development, and rese arch needed 
for major new accelera tor projects. Such growth is seeded by development of 
university g roups and targeted trai ning, such a s the curricu lum at the US Parti cle 
Accelerator School, structu red to provide opportunities to  a broad base of talent 
(Recommendation 5).
NSF support is important to th e unique role of universities , including exploration of 
novel ideas at the forefront of accelerator science, and educating the next generation. 
NSF h as an effective  program in p lasma-wakefield accelerators,  in magnet s cience, 
and in focused co nventional acce lerator centers. Building a general program, poten-
tially mo deled on the suc cessful NSF-DOE partnership in plasma science, would be of 
strong benefit. 
Investme nts in AS&T d rive innova tion tha t has benefits extending well beyond particle 
physics. AS&T efforts that dire ctly support particle physic s goals also me et critical n eeds 
in other offices, age ncies, and organizations . For example, major US facil ities such 
as LCLS-II, the f uture LCLS-II-HE, and the EIC rely on pas t and ongoing AS&T  
investments and provide workforce developmen t opportunities that should be 
encouraged.
More broadly, t hese investments lead to valuable partnerships with  othe r DOE Scie nce 
offices, other US agenci es such as the De fense Advanced Researc h Projects Agency 
Exploring the Quant um Universe: Path ways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle Physics
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel6: Investing in the Future of Science and Technology 89
(DARPA ) and the National Nuclear Security Agency ( NNSA ), academia, and industry. 
These partnerships are dynamic drivers of innovation and progress in accelerators that 
benefit both particle physics and the nation. They help build a national workforce that can 
develop and execute major accelerator projects (section 6.8).
In the global context, investment in accelerator-related technologies has increased 
dramatically over the last decade. This reflects a broad consensus about the importance 
of advanced technology development and scientific advances for the health of societ-
ies—from supporting a strong technology workforce to providing critical scientific and 
technical capabilities. Continued US investment is needed to maintain leadership and 
a robust workforce. Sustained investment and continued development of strong AS&T 
partnerships are key to maintaining a US leadership role (Recommendation 4c).
6.5
Collider R&D 
 
Targeted collider R&D is required to translate advancements in detector and accelerator 
technology into the experimental facilities that shape our understanding of the universe. 
The development of these future colliders requires broad R&D programs (sections 6.3 
and 6.4). It also requires increased investment in promising directions for specific future 
colliders. In the near term, an offshore Higgs factory and the exploration of 10 TeV pCM 
collider technologies present exciting possibilities, each requiring further development 
(section 6.4.1). Involvement in these efforts will reinvigorate accelerator physics research 
in the US and guide the direction of future R&D. 
Design choices for the detector and accelerator elements of a collider are inextricably 
intertwined. In this section, collider R&D therefore refers to both elements. 
Targeted R&D investments are crucial for developing comprehensive designs with cost 
models, guiding technology advancements and collider pathways, establishing advanced 
performance benchmarks for detectors and accelerators, and training the next generation 
of experts. This increased investment complements general detector and accelerator R&D 
(sections 6.3 and 6.4), which focuses on developing the necessary infrastructure and 
technologies. Such a synergistic approach is essential for positioning the US as a leader 
in projects outlined in our 20-year vision. The approach includes robust participation in 
an offshore Higgs factory and a pivotal role in shaping the path towards a future 10 TeV 
pCM machine, potentially on US soil.
Decisions related to construction of an offshore Higgs factory are anticipated to be 
made later this decade. The current designs of both FCC-ee  and the ILC satisfy our sci-
entific requirements. To secure a prominent role in a future Higgs factory project, the US 
should actively engage in feasibility and design studies (Recommendation 2c). Engagement 
with FCC-ee  specifically should include design and modeling to advance the feasibility 
study, as well as R&D on superconducting radio frequency cavities designed for the ring 
6: Investing in the Future of Science and Technology 90
and superconducting magnets designed for the interaction region. These efforts benefit 
from synergies in workforce development through participation in SuperKEKB  and the EIC. 
Maintaining engagement with ILC accelerators through the ILC Technology Network 
can include design updates and cryomodule construction, which will support significant 
US contributions to potential projects. A global framework for future collider development, 
such as the ILC International Development Team as implemented by ICFA  for the ILC, is 
relevant for all future colliders. 
For Higgs factory detectors, a concerted effort of targeted R&D synchronized with the 
targeted accelerator R&D program is needed. The US should engage in international de-
sign efforts for specific collider detectors. To achieve the scientific goals, several common 
requirements apply to the detectors of the various collider options, including vertexing, 
tracking, timing, particle identification, calorimetry, muon detection, and triggering. Central 
coordination of these requirements is crucial.
Major international decisions on the route to a Higgs factory are anticipated later 
this decade. Supported by the International Committee for Future Accelerators ( ICFA ), 
the Japanese HEP community remains committed to hosting the ILC in Japan as a global 
project. The FCC-ee  feasibility study is scheduled for completion by 2025 , followed by an 
update by the European Strategy Group and a decision by the CERN  Council. Once a 
specific project is deemed feasible and well-defined, the US should focus efforts toward 
that technology. A separate panel should determine the level and nature of US contribution 
while maintaining a healthy US onshore program in particle physics (Recommendation 6). 
In the scenario in which a global consensus to move forward with the Higgs factory is not 
reached, the next P5 should reevaluate.
Parallel to the R&D for a Higgs factory, the US should pursue a 10 TeV pCM collider. 
Designs addressing technical and cost feasibility for the future energy frontier at the 
10 TeV pCM  are required and build on technical progress in accelerator and detector 
technologies (Recommendation 4a). 
End-to-end designs are needed well before a decision can be made on a project in 
order to understand potential performance parameters and costs. These will guide research 
priorities, technology development, and demonstrator facilities. Such early designs will 
also play a critical role in creating and sustaining the expertise to design such machines. 
Progress on these end-to-end designs should be evaluated (Recommendation 6). 
The 10 TeV pCM energy scale and potential performance benefits motivate muon col-
lider development and ongoing work to advance proton and possible advanced wakefield 
accelerator paths (section 6.4.1). The US should pursue a leading role in the muon collider 
design effort, in concert with the International Muon Collider Collaboration ( IMCC ). The 
US role should include R&D on relevant technologies and preparations for a demonstrator 
facility. Delivery of a baseline design later this decade is also a crucial milestone. R&D of 
accelerator technologies (section 6.4)—including higher-field superconducting magnets 
crucial to both proton ( FCC-hh) and muon colliders, and high-temperature superconductors 
suitable for high field and temperature—are essential to this effort. Similarly, progress in 
advanced wakefield accelerators motivates efforts to develop a self-consistent design to 
understand feasibility and costs. Each of these research areas will benefit from interna-
tional engagement to enable timely progress. 
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel6: Investing in the Future of Science and Technology 91
Targeted detector R&D for 10 TeV pCM machines is needed to address challenges 
specific to these high-energy machines, such as ultrafast timing, radiation hardness, and 
high rate capabilities. In particular, detector R&D for a muon collider is needed to address 
challenges related to the unstable nature of muons. Beam-induced backgrounds due to 
the in-flight muon decays from the beam line can potentially inhibit the detectors’ ability 
to successfully reconstruct collision products. While many aspects of detector design 
and optimization are common to all future collider detectors, this unique feature requires 
dedicated study and R&D.
Overall, an iterative co-design process that integrates accelerator, detector, and 
simulation expertise is crucial for addressing challenges specific to 10 TeV pCM machines 
and for demonstrating their technical and costing feasibility. R&D efforts in the next five 
years will inform test facilities as discussed in section 6.4 for the mid- to late-decade time 
period, and collider design results will set the stage for initiating a demonstrator facility 
(Recommendation 6) that would feed into future decisions on a potential collider project. 
Area Recommendation 10: To enable targeted R&D before specific collider 
projects are established in the US, an investment in collider detector R&D of 
$20M  per year and collider accelerator R&D of $35M  per year in 2023  dollars 
is warranted. 
For the targeted detector R&D, we suggest initially allocating 70% of the funds for Higgs 
factory detector R&D, with about 30% reserved for 10 TeV pCM detector R&D. Once de-
tector R&D for a Higgs factory is funded and coordinated as a project, targeted detector 
R&D for a 10 TeV pCM machine should be ramped up.
6.6
Facilities and Infrastructure 
Experimental particle physics in the US relies on strategic facilities and infrastructure that 
enable exploration of the unknown. Stewardship of these facilities through maintenance, 
planning, and development is central to the future efforts recommended in this report. 
Maintaining existing capability is specifically outside the scope of this report. The sections 
below describe important enhancements to enable the science in this report.
6.6.1   –   Role of National Facilities
National laboratories and facilities are central to the major initiatives slated for the next 
decade, providing scientific and technical expertise, as well as the management, support, 
and site infrastructure essential to successful projects. Leading these global projects 
requires seamless collaboration between international and domestic partners, which 
6: Investing in the Future of Science and Technology 92
in turn requires frequent access to the laboratory sites. To meet this demand, national 
laboratories and funding agencies should pursue streamlined access policies that will 
enable researchers to work both on-site and remotely. In addition, facilitating procure -
ment processes and ensuring technical support for experimenters are essential to timely 
project completion and delivery of scientific results. Equally vital is the creation of a 
safe, inclusive, and welcoming culture within these facilities; diversity and openness are 
essential for the flourishing of innovation and scientific discovery on a global scale. In 
this pivotal role, US national laboratories and facilities are poised to drive the future of 
scientific exploration and collaboration.
Area Recommendation 11: To successfully deliver major initiatives and leading 
global projects, we recommend that: 
a.  National laboratories and facilities should work with funding agencies 
to establish and maintain streamlined access policies enabling efficient 
remote and on-site collaboration by international and domestic partners. 
b.  National laboratories should prioritize the facilitation of procurement 
processes and ensure robust technical support for experimenters. 
c.  National laboratories and facilities should prioritize the creation and main -
tenance of a supportive, inclusive, and welcoming culture. 
6.6.2   –   Fermilab Accelerator Complex 
The Fermilab Accelerator Complex began operations in 1967  and has become the center 
of accelerator-based particle physics in the US. Over the decades Fermilab has been 
modernized and upgraded based on necessities, and that continues today. Ongoing major 
upgrades of the proton complex by the PIP-II project (Recommendation 1c) will enable 
production of the world’s most intense high-energy beam of neutrinos for the DUNE  ex-
periment and will provide a variety of beams to other experiments. The ACORN  project 
is modernizing portions of the electronic controls and power systems. Planned improve-
ments to the MIRT  will allow timely delivery of 2.1 MW proton beams on target to ensure 
high-impact initial data sets from the DUNE  detectors (Recommendation 2b). 
Beyond these upgrades, the Fermilab Accelerator Complex must continue to evolve to 
support the next generations of experiments based on a high-performance proton complex. 
Preliminary concepts for the evolution of the accelerator complex have been explored; 
further development of a plan that accounts for changes in the science landscape and 
supports a multi-decadal vision for Fermilab is needed. We recommend that Fermilab 
work with the US and international communities to deliver a compelling long-term plan 
that identifies required R&D and defines a roadmap for upgrade efforts over the next two 
decades (Recommendations 4g and 6; section 6.6.2).
Area Recommendation 12: Form a dedicated task force, to be led by Fermilab 
with broad community membership. This task force is to be charged with  
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel6: Investing in the Future of Science and Technology 93
defining a roadmap for upgrade efforts and delivering a strategic 20-year plan 
for the Fermilab Accelerator Complex within the next five years for consider-
ation (Recommendation 6). Direct task force funding of up to $10M  should be 
provided. 
Optimal performance and reliability of the accelerator complex must be ensured to cap-
italize on the investments in the accelerators and the experiments, including DUNE . In 
particular, the reliability of the booster synchrotron was identified as a central factor in 
maximizing the DUNE  physics production, providing partial justification for a replacement. 
Even in the case of a rapid replacement, the DUNE  experiment will operate for several 
years at up to 2.1 MW, with MIRT , prior to a complete booster replacement. This period 
will be the most crucial for delivering the physics results. The reliability of the complex in 
this mode must be critically analyzed; toward that end, Fermilab should devise a modest 
set of mid-term investments to the booster and other existing infrastructure. 
Area Recommendation 13: Assess the booster synchrotron and related sys-
tems for reliability risks through the first decade of DUNE  operation, and take 
measures to preemptively address these risks.
6.6.3   –   Sanford Underground Research Facility 
 
The Sanford Underground Research Facility ( SURF ) is the nation’s premier site for particle 
physics research deep underground, enabling detection of rare interactions that would 
otherwise be swamped by the far more numerous interactions from particles bombarding 
Earth’s surface from space. Excavation for the Long Baseline Neutrino Facility ( LBNF ) 
will provide the shielded space for the DUNE  far detectors. Additional expansion of SURF  
using state and private funds, at a greatly reduced cost due to the mobilization for the 
DUNE  excavation, is currently planned. DOE  support for outfitting the resulting cavern(s) 
into a laboratory space would provide a US home for a G3 WIMP  dark matter search (as 
described in section 4.1), as well as space for other future particle or nuclear physics 
experiments for neutrinos or dark matter. 
Area Recommendation 14: To provide infrastructure for neutrino and/or dark 
matter experiments, we recommend DOE fund the cavern outfitting of the 
SURF  expansion. 
6.6.4   –   South Pole Station
 
The South Pole, the site of the NSF-operated Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station, is a 
unique site that enables groundbreaking scientific discoveries in particle physics and as-
trophysics. The world-leading infrastructure and logistics capabilities of the US Antarctic 
Program and South Pole Station in particular are a unique national resource that enables 
US scientific leadership. We commend the NSF Office of Polar Programs ( OPP) for their 
6: Investing in the Future of Science and Technology 94
leadership and vision in constructing and maintaining this facility, which is a monumental 
effort in such a remote location and a harsh environment. In the next decade, the South 
Pole can continue to be a place of US scientific leadership, pushing the boundaries of 
our understanding of fundamental physics in a way that can only be done at this site. 
US-led experiments sited at the South Pole—the South Pole Telescope, the BICEP  
suite of telescopes, and the IceCube  Observatory—have produced important discoveries 
in fundamental physics. For experiments that observe the CMB , the South Pole provides 
a high, dry, stable atmosphere with continuous access year-round for deep observations 
of the same low-foreground patch of sky. These observing conditions are particularly 
important for measuring the signal from inflation in the early universe that is imprinted 
on the CMB . For IceCube , the South Pole provides an unmatched volume of deep, clear 
glacial ice that allows for precision observations of optical signals made by astrophysical 
neutrino interactions in the ice.
The significant advancements in our understanding of inflation and the early universe 
by CMB -S4 and the wide range of exciting science enabled by neutrino astrophysics in 
IceCube -Gen2  will be made possible through continued NSF investment in infrastructure 
at the South Pole. NSF has begun a South Pole Master Planning Process to create a 
plan for maintaining critical infrastructure and capabilities with a 30- to 500-year horizon. 
Beyond maintenance, further expansion of the capacity to support projects at the South 
Pole would allow for more future scientific opportunities. Renewable energy infrastructure 
at the South Pole is an exciting opportunity to streamline and expand the capabilities for 
supporting science.
Area Recommendation 15: Maintaining the capabilities of NSF’s infrastructure 
at the South Pole, focused on enabling future world-leading scientific discov-
eries, is essential. We recommend continued and critically important direct 
coordination and planning between NSF-OPP and the CMB-S4 and IceCube -Gen2  
projects.
 
6.7
Software, Computing,  
and Data Science
Software and computing play a critical role in maximizing the science output of particle 
physics experiments. They are an integral component of experimental design, trigger 
and data acquisition, simulation, reconstruction, and data analysis. They also underlie 
simulation and design of particle accelerators. The complexity, computational needs and 
data volumes of particle physics experiments are expected to increase dramatically in the 
next decade or so. Advances in software and computing, including AI/ML , will be key for 
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel6: Investing in the Future of Science and Technology 95
solving the challenges associated with the data deluge and for enhancing the sensitivity 
of the experimental results.
6.7.1   –   Software, Computing, and Cyberinfrastructure
A hallmark of particle physics is scientific instruments that produce extremely large data-
sets. For example, at the ATLAS  and CMS  experiments at the LHC, sophisticated real-time 
algorithms implemented in hardware and software discard all but the most interesting 
0.01% of collisions, with a final recorded output that still consists of tens of petabytes of 
raw data per year. These datasets are then processed to translate detector signals into 
a coherent picture of the particles created in the collisions.
Collecting, managing, and analyzing these datasets is a key challenge and represents 
a significant portion of the total operations cost for many projects. At the same time, sim-
ulating the quantum mechanics of particle interactions and the corresponding detector 
signals at the necessary level of precision to interpret the data poses processing and 
storage challenges of equivalent or larger complexity to analyzing raw data. Software, 
computing, and the overarching cyberinfrastructure are essential parts of project portfolios.
The enormous computational demands of particle physics call for expanded invest-
ments in R&D to maximize the physics reach of the programs. These R&D efforts have 
been synergistic with national initiatives in AI/ML , quantum computing, and microelectron-
ics. Funding agencies should continue to leverage the resources made available through 
those national initiatives.
Area Recommendation 16: Resources for national initiatives in AI/ML , quantum 
computing, and microelectronics should be leveraged and incorporated into 
research and R&D efforts to maximize the physics reach of the program.
Constantly emerging advances in computing can reduce costs and expand capabilities 
that enable new science. These advances are powered by new computing architectures, 
software paradigms, network capabilities, and access to expanded computing resources. 
Leveraging these advances, however, requires significant effort. 
Based on experience from the past decade, we recommend adding support for a 
sustained R&D effort—at the level of $9M per year in 2023  dollars—to adapt to emerging 
hardware and other computing technologies. This should include efforts to transition the 
products of software R&D into production. We also suggest that DOE ’s Office of High 
Energy Physics and NSF’s Directorates for Mathematical and Physical Sciences and  
Astronomy coordinate with other programs within the Office of Science and NSF to ensure 
that the profile of computing resources available matches the needs of particle physics 
experiments.
Area Recommendation 17: Add yearly support by $9M per year in 2023  dol-
lars for a sustained R&D effort to adapt software and computing systems to 
emerging hardware, incorporate other advances in computing technologies, 
6: Investing in the Future of Science and Technology 96
and fund directed efforts to transition those developments into systems used 
for operations of experiments and facilities.
The potential of the quantum computing paradigm and QIS has given rise to a National 
Quantum Initiative. The initiative encourages transformative scientific discoveries through 
investments in core QIS research programs. The national strategy includes investments 
that target the discovery of quantum applications and foster quantum-relevant skills in 
the next generation of scientists and engineers. The quantum nature of particle physics 
phenomena provides a rich set of problems in which quantum computing is expected to 
have an inherent advantage over classical computing. For example, quantum computing 
approaches can resolve fundamental challenges to studying the structure of nuclear 
matter that are encountered with the classical computing approaches. 
To adapt to the quickly changing landscape, we support the creation of a group 
focused on software and computing, modeled after the Coordinating Panel for  
Advanced Detectors ( CPAD ). Such a group would serve as a valuable resource for DOE 
and NSF to consult in order to ensure a coordinated strategy for computing that maximizes 
the impact of investments in computational infrastructure. 
We must ensure sustained development, maintenance, and user support for key 
cyberinfrastructure components, including widely used software packages, simulation 
tools, and information resources, such as the Particle Data Group and INSPIRE . Although 
most of these shared cyberinfrastructure components are not specifically tied to projects, 
nearly all scientists in the field rely on them. A significant investment—at the level of 
$4M per year in 2023  dollars—for this type of shared cyberinfrastructure with dedicated 
personnel is appropriate. 
As the nation and the world increasingly embrace open science, now is the time for 
a paradigm shift in the long-term preservation, dissemination, and analysis of the unique 
data collected by various experiments and surveys in order to realize their full scientific 
impact. An investment at the level of $4M per year in 2023  dollars is needed to establish 
these new forms of shared infrastructure and the dedicated personnel. The infrastructure 
should support the requisite theoretical inputs and computational requirements for analysis.
Area Recommendation 18: Increase targeted investments that ensure sus-
tained support for key cyberinfrastructure components by $8M per year in 
2023  dollars. This includes widely-used software packages, simulation tools, 
information resources such as the Particle Data Group and INSPIRE , as well as 
the shared infrastructure for preservation, dissemination, and analysis of the 
unique data collected by various experiments and surveys in order to realize 
their full scientific impact.
Research scientists and research software engineers at universities and labs are key to 
realizing the vision of the field. They possess highly specialized knowledge and are crit-
ical for maintaining a technologically advanced workforce. Strong investments in career 
development, including recruiting, training, and retention, will ensure future success. 
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel6: Investing in the Future of Science and Technology 97
Area Recommendation 19: Research software engineers and other profession-
als at universities and labs are key to realizing the vision of the field and are 
critical for maintaining a technologically advanced workforce. We recommend 
that the funding agencies embrace these roles as a critical component of the 
workforce when investing in software, computing, and cyberinfrastructure.
6.7.2   –    Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning,  
and Data Science
The particle physics community benefits from and contributes to the rapid advances in 
artificial intelligence ( AI) and machine learning ( ML). Our field has used various forms of 
ML for decades to enhance the sensitivity of experiments through more efficient acceler -
ator control, data collection, and data analysis. The rise of deep learning has dramatically 
expanded the potential for these approaches by bringing qualitatively new capabilities, 
including the ability to work with low-level sensor data, to generate synthetic data, and 
to identify anomalies in data. 
These capabilities can have a comparable impact on the physics reach of experiments 
as do enhancements to accelerator facilities, instrumentation, and detector design. Per-
forming AI inference in reprogrammable hardware, closer to the detectors in the readout 
path, will unlock new capabilities in data collection. Emerging techniques in generative 
artificial intelligence are leading to productivity enhancements, particularly in writing code 
for software; these technologies may dramatically alter the way physicists develop code 
to analyze data or accelerate the process of porting code to new computing architectures. 
Advances are also being made in formal mathematics and mathematical physics where 
generative AI can serve as a creative assistant or be paired with a verification system. 
The transformative potential of AI should drive a robust investment targeted at indi-
vidual projects and cross-cutting capacity to accelerate technology transfer. Resources 
for the national initiatives in AI should be incorporated into research and R&D efforts to 
maximize the physics reach of the program.
Specific skills are needed to deploy AI and advanced statistics techniques to datasets 
at the scale found in particle physics, both in real time during data collection and during 
the subsequent data analysis. Because particle physicists must understand analysis tech-
niques, data management, and software and computing infrastructure, the field of particle 
physics has proven to be an excellent training ground for data scientists. By aligning the 
tools and techniques used in particle physics with those used in industry, the field can 
more quickly benefit from advances driven by industrial data science applications and 
ensure that the training experiences translate outside of particle physics.
6: Investing in the Future of Science and Technology 98
6.8
T echnology Innovations  
and Impact on Society
 
Particle physicists have a long history of recognizing, embracing, and fostering emerging 
technologies. The devices and tools that particle physics develops enable applications 
beyond fundamental physics in fields as different as medicine and aerospace. This section 
outlines the many ways particle physics spurs innovation, with example impacts. 
6.8.1   –   Computing
Particle physicists are the stewards of some of the world’s largest datasets and there-
fore have a special connection to computing and data applications. Particle physicists 
were among the first to transition from analog to digitized data systems and were early 
adopters of the use of machine learning algorithms. The world wide web and the web 
browser were invented at CERN  as an efficient information sharing system for particle 
physicists. To cope with enormous datasets, particle physicists played leading roles in the 
development of global-scale distributed computing technologies and high-performance 
networking. The ambitious portfolio of projects proposed for the next 10 years will drive 
innovation that addresses the scientific needs of the particle physics community and will 
broadly impact society.
6.8. 2   –   Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
 
The unique challenges encountered in particle physics have proven to be fertile ground 
for innovation of AI/ML . Importing new techniques into the particle physics context requires 
a process of translation, through which those techniques are stress-tested, generalized, 
and improved. Those improvements feed back into the wider AI/ML  research community, 
completing a cycle of use-inspired research.
For example, when particle physicists began incorporating advances in deep learning 
for images, it revealed that these techniques were not well suited to nonuniform detector 
geometries or sparse data with high dynamic range. Coping with these unique chal-
lenges led to rapid innovations in graph neural networks and geometric deep learning. 
These developments were effective at building cross-disciplinary collaborations including 
universities, national labs, and the private sector and led to innovations that have been 
incorporated into the mainstream of AI/ML  research.
We are witnessing an unprecedented level of cross-pollination among scientific dis-
ciplines as AI/ML  has become a common language and vehicle to transfer innovations. 
AI-enhanced statistical inference techniques developed for particle physics are now being 
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel6: Investing in the Future of Science and Technology 99
used in fields as disparate as materials science, neuroscience, systems biology, epidemi-
ology, and genetics. Similarly, AI-enhanced Monte Carlo sampling techniques developed 
for lattice QCD  are co-evolving with the techniques used to study molecular dynamics and 
gravitational waves. In addition, many of the technical developments at the core of modern 
machine learning frameworks, such as automatic differentiation, are being incorporated 
into traditional scientific computing. These advances have involved partnerships among 
scientists working closely with AI researchers and applied mathematicians. Furthermore, 
they impact a wide range of industrial applications.
6.8.3   –   Quantum Information Science
Particle physics is intrinsically rooted in the realm of quantum mechanics. This unique 
intersection of particle physics and quantum science positions the field as a vital con-
tributor to the National Quantum Initiative. Particle physics is deeply involved in all five 
National Quantum Information Science Centers and actively engages in various activities 
sponsored by DOE  and NSF.
The precision and sensitivity of particle detectors directly hinge on the capabilities 
of the sensors and the noise levels in the associated electronics. To meet the stringent 
demands of the field, particle physics has long used cutting-edge quantum sensing tech-
niques and ultra-low-noise electronics to meet the stringent requirements of the science. 
Hence particle physics is an ideal testing ground for these technologies. Several of the 
DMNI  experiments are perfect examples of this paradigm. They are pushing beyond the 
standard quantum limit for electronic noise and scale the number of channels deployed. 
A strong connection exists between quantum information science and particle theory. 
A wide variety of problems in high energy physics cannot be addressed using classical 
computation. There is a strong effort to explore the potential of quantum simulation to 
render complex and previously insurmountable problems into manageable ones. There is 
significant effort to use the profound connections between quantum information theory and 
quantum gravity to form a better understanding of these complex fundamental problems. 
In addition, next-generation experiments are beginning to explore technologically and 
theoretically what could be measured by actively preparing entangled quantum systems. 
6.8.4   –   Microelectronics
 
The particle physics community has developed application-specific integrated circuits 
(ASIC s) to cope with extreme environments, such as high levels of ionizing radiation or 
cryogenic temperatures. These developments are benefitting areas outside of particle 
physics, such as space exploration and defense needs. Specialized cryogenic and ener-
gy efficient microelectronics designs and integration techniques are now adopted by the 
microelectronics industry. In addition, the microelectronics facilities established at the 
national laboratories are of growing interest to commercial partners.
6: Investing in the Future of Science and Technology 100
6.8.5   –   Detectors and Instrumentation
 
Detectors for particle physics have found their way into many applications that benefit 
society. One of the most profound is in the area of medical imaging. Detectors devel-
oped for vertexing, tracking, and photon detection in particle physics can also be used 
to minimize exposure times for patients. Over time, technology advancements in particle 
detectors have lowered detection thresholds and have thus allowed reduction of the dose 
needed for medical imaging applications. Single photon detectors that were developed for 
low-mass dark matter searches, such as Skipper -CCD s, are being used in nuclear non-
proliferation applications. Silicon-based tracking detectors have also found application in 
muon tomography of ancient structures like pyramids, enabling scans for hidden caverns. 
Development in tracking detectors of cosmic-ray muons made the recent archeological 
discovery of hidden chambers in the Great Pyramid of Giza possible. In addition to these 
examples, the development and construction of advanced detectors and instrumentation 
is critical for training the technical and scientific workforce. Many detector physicists move 
into careers that focus on the application of these technologies.
6.8.6   –   Accelerators 
 
Particle accelerators exemplify how development of frontier machines for high-energy 
physics enables broad science and societal applications, including x-ray light sources, 
material science, medical therapy, and particle sources for national security and industry. 
As an example of such broad science, accelerator structures developed for the ILC are 
enabling a new generation of light sources including LCLS -II and LCLS -II-HE. Light sources 
and other new capabilities have been made possible through decades of development of 
transformational accelerator techniques by the particle physics community. 
Accelerator technology development enables further applications. Magnets have 
benefitted applications including medicine and fusion development. Similarly, lasers have 
greater impacts including advanced manufacturing, medicine and security applications. 
Future advances, such as those needed to reach higher beam powers and energies, will 
inspire yet more research on very-high-field magnets, extraordinarily intense beams, and 
accelerator technologies with the potential to be radically more compact (Recommenda-
tions 4a and 4c; sections 2.3.2, 6.3, 6.4, and 6.5). In turn, these developments may lead 
to improved efficacy in cancer treatment, more compact fusion devices, and compact 
sources of particles and radiation for industry and security, both benefiting from and re-
inforcing particle physics investment.
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel6: Investing in the Future of Science and Technology 101
6.9
Sustainability and the Environment
 
Commitment to sustainability is a high priority for particle physics activities. This includes 
energy and carbon management, energy efficiency and savings, and environmental impact. 
It concerns present and future accelerators as well as testing and computing facilities. 
In the study of future accelerator projects, it is important to establish and launch at an 
early stage a full lifecycle sustainability effort. Because future accelerators, conceived for 
higher beam energies and intensities, will have higher energy demands, the promotion of 
energy efficient accelerator concepts and identification and development of energy-saving 
accelerator technology are critical. These considerations will affect the affordability of new 
accelerators and demonstrate the responsible role of the HEP community in society.
Accelerator technologies play a key role in sustainability. Investments in high field 
magnets by the DOE  Magnet Development Program and NSF’s MagLab  have advanced 
the state of the art superconductors and magnet design to the benefit of particle physics, 
but also materials science, fusion energy research, and commercial development. In this 
context, high temperature superconducting materials, operated at temperatures higher 
than superfluid or liquid helium, can be significant in reducing energy consumption—for 
example, for future colliders including muons or FCC-hh. Accelerator structure improve-
ments could also be significant, including higher quality factor cavities, and concepts like 
the Cool Copper Collider.
Other new technologies such as muon and possibly wakefield colliders have potential 
to improve power required for a given luminosity and reduce the size and environmental 
impact of future facilities. Innovation in electric power generation, management, and dis-
tribution also contribute to sustainable development and will be encouraged.
Upgrade, construction, and operation of accelerator complex (section 4.2) and test 
facilities are part of the global effort to advance particle physics. Defining sustainable 
requirements on industrially procured technology, including construction, electrical, and 
cooling equipment, should be included in the project development.
To contribute to the global decarbonization effort, future projects will aim to reduce 
the CO 2 footprint of their civil engineering components. Research and adoption of sus -
tainable and eco-friendly materials will be encouraged, and this applies to gases with high 
global warming impact used in some types of detectors. Study of alternative solutions 
will be investigated and implemented, in addition to the adoption of stringent recirculation 
requirements when those gases are used. Reuse of materials should be encouraged to 
foster sustainable development and to limit the use of natural resources and raw materi-
als, including critical minerals that are subject to potential shortages.
The international nature of particle physics activities calls for extensive travel to 
participate in meetings and conferences and to carry out experiments. The dramatic in-
crease in the use of remote conferencing mandated by the COVID -19 pandemic spurred 
Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle Physics6: Investing in the Future of Science and Technology 102
an evolution of practices and technologies that allow researchers to increase participa -
tion and inclusivity. With this new paradigm in place, laboratories should facilitate hybrid 
meetings and invest in upgrades to video conferencing equipment as necessary. Meeting 
organizers should establish protocols that ensure people connecting from remote loca-
tions can participate fully, including in discussions. At the same time, in-person meetings 
remain strongly valuable and should not be discouraged; they facilitate open and effective 
communication and build trust in international partnership. Assessing and implementing 
sustainability strategies require R&D and investment of appropriate resources. The field 
would benefit from development of consistent metrics for sustainability of research, con-
struction, and operations. 
Area Recommendation 20: Charge HEPAP , potentially in collaboration with 
international partners, to conduct a dedicated study aiming at developing a 
sustainability strategy for particle physics. 
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics 
Project Prioritization Panel
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel 103
 7
A T echnologically 
Advanced Workforce 
for Particle Physics 
and the NationReport of the 2023  Particle Physics 
Project Prioritization Panel
7:  A Technologically Advanced Workforce for Particle 104 
Physics and the Nation
Addressing the profound scientific inquiries within particle physics,  
from understanding the fundamental building blocks of nature to 
mapping out the evolution of the universe, requires a creative and 
technologically advanced workforce operating in an environment  
of mutual trust. The inherent curiosity driving our exploration of the 
natural world is a universal aspect of human nature. This shared  
curiosity serves as the driving force behind our commitment to 
strengthening and expanding this workforce and prompts us to  
actively seek talent from all corners of society and all regions of the 
country, and the world.
The stewardship of our field demands active engagement with diverse perspectives that 
provide innovative strategies and solutions to complex problems. Achieving increased 
participation and diversity of perspective entails implementing practices that support 
ethical conduct of research, dismantling existing barriers, recruiting broadly, and forging 
new pathways of opportunity to ensure that particle physics thrives as an inclusive and 
dynamic discipline.
Moreover, the design, construction, operation, and analysis work of high energy phys-
ics not only advances our scientific endeavors but also trains the researchers, engineers, 
and technicians urgently needed in mission-critical areas for the US. These areas include 
hardware and chip development, large-scale computing, QIS, and AI/ML . It is imperative 
that we provide exciting career pathways within our field to retain the necessary talent. 
Simultaneously, we must continue to educate the many technologically adept research-
ers and technical personnel who robustly contribute to society outside particle physics. 
Additionally, engaging with the public by sharing our scientific discoveries and underscor-
ing how our work contributes to industries beyond particle physics further enhances the 
impact and relevance of our pursuit.
7.1
Ethical Research in Particle Physics
Science is built on trust. When we work ethically, we maintain confidence in our scientific 
results within our community and with the public. Trust within our community is developed 
through transparency and an open, constructive exchange of views. The two key princi-
ples for ethical behavior are telling the truth and treating others with respect. Telling the 
truth means our science is robust and transparent: our data is presented accurately, we 
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel7:  A Technologically Advanced Workforce for Particle 105 
Physics and the Nation
present original work, we make our data publicly available whenever possible, and we 
fairly allocate credit. Treating others with respect requires maintaining a professional work 
environment, free from harassment and abuse. Discrimination, harassment, or bullying in 
a scientific collaboration harms individuals, disrupts scientific progress, and is therefore 
scientific misconduct. 
We must collaborate to do our science, which by necessity brings together people at 
various career stages and from a diverse set of backgrounds. Within these collaborations, 
ethical standards must be stated clearly and upheld in order for our community members 
and our science to thrive. Establishing and maintaining these standards includes setting 
professional expectations, reporting violations, and having a process to rectify violations. 
Such infrastructure should include ombudspersons, independent investigators in cases 
of egregious alleged violations, training for those in leadership positions, and training to 
encourage collaborators to create an environment in which people can thrive and scientific 
output can reach its potential. Laboratories and funding agencies are charged to support 
such infrastructure (Recommendation 5a). 
7. 2
Recruiting, T raining, and Retaining 
Particle accelerators and detectors are among the most complex instruments ever created 
by human ingenuity. Electronics, cryogenics, magnets, vacuum systems, and a complex 
array of other hardware must work together to deliver signals that probe the fundamental 
nature of the universe. These instruments, boasting billions of electronic channels and 
systems sensitive to rare processes that operate at the quantum noise threshold, create 
intricate datasets. Harnessing this wealth of data requires advanced computing techniques 
and mathematics, sophisticated statistical tools, and the transformative power of AI/ML . At 
the core of this endeavor lies a critical component: an exceptionally talented workforce.
To nurture this workforce, it is imperative to recruit individuals with a broad range 
of backgrounds and provide them with the skills and resources needed to advance the 
field. To retain this workforce we must provide career pathways and an environment that 
encourages and rewards exemplary work.
Some particle physics-trained researchers will chart career paths in other areas of 
academia, and in government and industry. Their multidimensional and technical expertise 
in areas such as accelerators, quantum sensors, and AI/ML , will make them sought after 
for jobs in quantum computing, medical physics, and other data-rich environments. Their 
particle physics training will equip them to drive innovation and will have a profound impact 
on the nation’s scientific and technology landscape, as well as society at large. 
7:  A Technologically Advanced Workforce for Particle 106 
Physics and the Nation
Recruiting: We should draw research and technical personnel from both a national and 
international talent pool. Recruitment should address historic and ongoing patterns of 
underrepresentation in particle physics by engaging broadly in educational efforts and 
dissemination of scientific findings to the public. Pathways to cutting-edge research at 
the frontiers of our field should be expanded to reach a broader cross section of students. 
Strategic academic partnerships connecting different types of academic and research 
institutions are important to this effort, and continued support is recommended (Recom-
mendation 5b). There should be a concerted effort to include institutions which reach 
historically underrepresented groups such as minority-serving and rural institutions. 
Training: Given the technologically advanced skill sets needed to ensure a robust future 
for particle physics, we must have strong programs that pass knowledge from experienced 
experts to new participants in the field. Imparting knowledge to the next generation is 
crucial to keeping our field at the forefront of AI/ML , quantum sensors, accelerators, and 
a host of other technologies needed for current and future research. Programs like the US 
Particle Accelerator School and the Theoretical Advanced Study Institute in Elementary 
Particle Physics ( TASI ) are essential ingredients in equipping the next generation with 
key skills and require sustained support (Recommendation 5b). 
Retaining: People are our most precious resource. Scientific advances rely on the co-
ordinated efforts of experimental and theoretical physicists, technicians, engineers, and 
administrative support staff. An infrastructure that facilitates individual participation in 
these efforts will allow us to meet the community’s ethical standards, ensure good stew-
ardship of human resources, and help retain talent. This infrastructure must ensure ac-
cessibility, including living wages and sufficient support for those with family and caregiver 
responsibilities (Recommendation 5b). Studies of the work climate of the field, informed 
by experts in sociology and organizational psychology, can allow us to identify barriers 
to participation and gauge our progress (Recommendation 5c). 
In addition to creating an environment conducive to good science, we must maintain a 
critical mass of technical expertise. Researchers applying for funding should be required 
to have mentoring plans in place for all group members, with an emphasis on early career 
researchers and those without permanent positions. Strategic support for research scien-
tists, engineers, and other technical experts at universities and national labs also plays a 
key role by providing alternative pathways to retain key expertise (Recommendation 5d).
Requirements from funding agencies via proposal guidelines, project evaluations, 
and reviews of operating experiments, are critical to ensuring that the particle physics 
community will successfully recruit, train, and retain a technologically advanced work-
force with the diverse talents to meet our scientific needs. NSF and DOE  have provided 
significant leadership, accelerated in recent years, that includes funding opportunities 
that expand the number of institutions and individuals engaging in particle physics. The 
agencies have also strengthened the requirements surrounding mentoring plans for 
grant-funded personnel, increased the focus on dissemination of results, and paid closer 
attention to improving workplace climate in the national laboratories and experimental 
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel7:  A Technologically Advanced Workforce for Particle 107 
Physics and the Nation
collaborations. Efforts on these topics are rapidly evolving, and a systematic review of 
the existing framework, with an eye toward additional opportunities, would advance the 
development of needed expertise in particle physics. 
7. 3
Engaging With the Public
The dissemination of results to the public is a crucial ingredient of successful scientific 
projects. The big questions—uncovering the dynamics of the early universe and investi-
gating the nature of matter, energy, space, and time—can inspire the public and contrib-
ute to long-term workforce development by nurturing interest and attracting future STEM  
talent. In addition to physics results, there are exciting stories to tell about how large 
international teams work together to invent new technologies, solve hard problems, and 
achieve common goals.
In many cases, technological advances in particle physics lead to progress in indus -
tries beyond scientific research. The public, which funds the science, deserves to learn 
about the discoveries of particle physics and understand the broader impact the field has 
on society. Dissemination of that information, in turn, is critical in engaging the workforce 
needed and enabling future science discoveries and societal benefits.
It is the duty of the particle physics community to recognize the value of public en-
gagement. Opportunities to learn science communication skills are available through the 
funding agencies and professional societies, but they should be more broadly advertised. 
Additional recognition of the value of public engagement is essential to building the neces-
sary culture. A plan for dissemination of scientific results to the public should be included 
in the proposed operations and research budgets of projects and experiments, and such 
a plan should be supported by the agencies (Recommendation 5e).
 “Science is built on trust. When 
we work ethically, we maintain  
confidence in our scientific results 
within our community and with  
the public.”
 8
Budgetary  
Considerations 109
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel
8: Budgetary Considerations 110
A clear challenge to this P5 was to realize our vision within the 
provided budget scenarios. We carried this out with clear principles 
of prioritization. Below are the rationales for the choices we made 
for the baseline scenario and for the less favorable scenario. 
8.1
Prioritization Principles
In the process of prioritization, we considered scientific opportunities, budgetary realism, 
and a balanced portfolio as major decision drivers. 
Clear principles for the prioritization of scientific opportunities guided the deliberations 
of P5, as outlined in section 1.6. In addition, depending on project scale, our minimum 
requirements were:
Large projects ( > $250M )
• Paradigm-changing discovery potential
• World-leading
• Unique
Medium projects ( $50M –$250M )
• Excellent discovery potential or development of major tools
• World-class
• Competitive
Small projects ( < $50M )
•  Discovery potential, well-defined measurements, or outstanding  
technology development
• World-class
• Excellent training grounds
To provide us with a fair and dependable basis for evaluating big projects, we set up a 
subcommittee with project experts from the physics community, which reviewed the matu-
rity of cost estimates, the risk analysis and mitigation plans, and the proposed schedule. 
The subcommittee provided an expected cost range for each project and comments on 
project risks, budget maturity, and schedule. We also considered the uncertainties in the 
costs, risks, and schedule as part of our prioritization exercise. The prioritized project 
portfolios were chosen to fit within a few percent of the budget scenarios and to ensure a 
reasonable outlook for continuation into the second decade, even though that is beyond 
the purview of this panel. 
Finally, we paid careful attention to the balance in the program in terms of:
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel8: Budgetary Considerations 111
Size and timescale of projects. Large projects push the boundaries of our capabilities 
and bring together broad communities of people. Small projects operate on shorter time 
scales, which provide crucial training and leadership opportunities for young scientists 
and have the potential for transformative breakthroughs. 
Onshore vs. offshore. Onshore projects can leverage the unique capabilities of US facili-
ties and ensure our leadership. The global nature of our field necessarily means that we 
would like to participate in offshore projects for important physics experiments, with the 
benefits of lower cost and cooperation with international partners. Yet there are logistical 
and financial issues associated with the need to travel abroad frequently. 
Project vs. research. Projects are meant to produce cutting-edge data, which need to 
be analyzed and interpreted by activities in research. However, research is where new 
ideas and concepts are conceived of in order to guide the design of projects. In addi-
tion, research supports people, namely graduate students, postdocs, and scientists, and 
therefore requires an adequate level of funding to ensure the future health of the field. 
Current vs. future investment. The field relies on current projects to produce science, train 
people, and advance the field. Without careful investment in the future, our capabilities 
will diminish and the US will lose its global leadership. Future investments include tech-
nology, such as accelerators, detectors, and computing, as well as the theory that guides 
the field. The portfolio, like all investments, requires regular rebalancing. 
8.2
Hard Choices for Baseline  
Budget Scenario
The overall cost of the projects proposed during the Snowmass community study exceeded 
the budget scenario by many times. As a result, we had to make tough choices based on 
the principles stated above. We carefully selected projects that have the biggest scientific 
impact while maintaining the balance among science areas and satisfying the budgetary 
constraints, resulting in an exciting program for the next ten years. The baseline budget 
scenario assumes an initial bump in the budget thanks to the CHIPS  and Science Act, 
and an annual 3% increase to keep pace with inflation.
The following project list reflects the sacrifices made in P5’s prioritization process, 
starting with the largest and moving down to the funding level of approximately $100M .
Onshore Higgs factory.  We could not identify room in the budget executable in the next 20 
years for an onshore Higgs factory unless the overall budget is several times higher. On 
the other hand, there is an ongoing process in Europe to see if FCC-ee is feasible. The 
Japanese HEP community has been making an effort to realize ILC as a global project 
8: Budgetary Considerations 112
hosted in Japan. We therefore recommend exploring offshore options and vigorously 
pursuing international collaborations so the US can play a major role when one of those 
projects becomes reality. If FCC-ee and ILC are judged to be not feasible, a new panel 
should revisit the possibility of bidding to host a Higgs factory in the US, potentially as 
a global project and including advanced technology options. 
Fermilab Accelerator Complex Extension Booster Replacement ( ACE-BR). Extending the 
capability of the accelerator complex is important to secure the future of particle physics. 
Unfortunately, the cost of the proposed options was prohibitive for the given time period. 
Additionally, it is not yet clear how the extension will enhance Fermilab’s capability to 
support future high-energy colliders, which are key to this report’s long-term vision. We 
therefore recommend MIRT , a less expensive option that achieves 2.1 MW of beam power 
(instead of 2.4 MW) earlier than envisioned by ACE-BR, augmented by a reliability upgrade 
(section 6.6.2) of the current booster to provide the required beam for DUNE .
DUNE FD4 . As described in sections 3.1.3 and 3.1.4, the re-envisioned plan for DUNE  
Phase 2 enables DUNE ’s science goals to be achieved with only three LAr far detector 
modules in the 2040 s time frame. It also provides an opportunity for the FD4 to host a 
different type of detector or enhanced LAr detector to expand the science program of 
DUNE , leveraging the deep underground site and powerful beam. This budget scenario 
can accommodate only R&D for FD4 during this period. 
One of two G3 experiments for direct detection of WIMP  dark matte r. There were two 
major proposals for dark matter experiments with sensitivity to reach the neutrino fog, 
envisioned to be the ultimate sensitivity achievable with the current technology. Even 
though the two proposals are attractive, we cannot accommodate both in this budget 
scenario. We recommend that the US bids to host one G3 experiment at a new cavity at 
SURF . If the bid fails, the US should become a leading partner in one outside the US. If 
the funding situation is better than in the baseline scenario, or if NSF or other partners 
can make a substantial contribution, or if an experiment shows a hint of a detection, a 
second experiment may be considered, possibly outside the US.
Spec-S5 . This project follows the current world-leading project DESI  and the follow-up 
DESI -II program to significantly enhance the sensitivity to the physics behind dark en-
ergy, dark matter, and inflation. We endorse the scientific objectives of the proposal, 
but it, including the cost estimate, was not sufficiently mature to recommend it. Instead, 
we recommend support for R&D on smaller fiber positioners to take spectra of a much 
larger number of objects simultaneously and to define the survey concept and required 
telescopes. In a more favorable budget scenario, the project may be considered once its 
scope is well-defined and technical feasibility has been demonstrated. 
Mu2e-II . Mu2e  extends the discovery reach for charged lepton flavor violation by four 
orders of magnitude, while Mu2e -II is proposed to further extend it by another order of 
magnitude. Mu2e , once in operation, will take data until 2034 . Considering budget reality, 
scientific case, and the need for informed design choices, we recommend R&D and await 
the outcome and performance of Mu2e  before starting to fund Mu2e -II. 
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel8: Budgetary Considerations 113
srEDM . Electric dipole moment experiments are powerful searches for quantum imprints at 
higher energy scales. A rich program of EDM  searches exists within other DOE programs. 
We judge that the science case for HEP to enter this area needs to mature, especially 
relative to the cost of such a program. 
MATHUSLA . By exploiting the HL-LHC beam by placing a detector away from the colli-
sion point, MATHUSLA  has a large discovery potential. It does require commitment from 
CERN  for civil engineering, which is yet to be decided. If downsized, it would qualify as 
a candidate in the ASTAE  portfolio.
Forward Physics Facility. This item has a broad physics program utilizing the beam of 
HL-LHC by placing detectors at the forward direction from the collision point. The facility 
does require commitment from CERN  for civil engineering, which is yet to be decided. 
The bundled request for the US funding of the FPF trio of experiments does not fit into 
our budget. However, individual experiments in the facility can be candidates in the 
ASTAE  portfolio.
Some of the tough choices about which projects to include were based on the need to 
rebalance the portfolio to allow for research in underfunded areas of theory, instrumenta-
tion, computing, GARD , a new program for agile experiments, and a virtually non-existent 
targeted collider R&D program. 
8.3
Difficult Choices for Less Favorable 
Budget Scenario
The less favorable budget scenario assumes a 2% increase in budget per year, which 
does not keep pace with the assumed 3% annual inflation. Actual inflation may be even 
higher. In this scenario, we had to make harder choices than those made for the base-
line budget scenario. We can maintain a minimum portfolio to continue some scientific 
progress, although US leadership will begin to erode in much of the field, jeopardizing 
our 20-year vision for the US particle physics program. Impacts on some of the major 
projects are described below:
Reduced contribution to an offshore Higgs factory.  The US contribution will be reduced 
and the US cannot play a commensurate role as an international partner in the project. 
DUNE FD3  with deferred ACE-MIRT . This scenario explicitly forces a delay in the DUNE  
Phase 2 timeline of execution, making the project less competitive and hurting the US 
reputation as a host for large international projects. In a technically limited schedule, the 
order of phase II elements is MIRT , FD3, and MCND . There is a compelling science case 
for these three components and hence when budgets allow this would be the preferred 
8: Budgetary Considerations 114
order of construction. If, on the other hand, budgets are more constrained, trade-offs also 
have to consider the science lost. In the long run the same statistics for the beam physics 
would be obtained by the addition of either MIRT  or FD3. However, FD3 offers a broader 
set of science topics related to non-beam physics like supernovae and also has a better 
potential of attracting international support than MIRT . Therefore, in a budget-constrained 
scenario FD3 is prioritized over MIRT . MCND  requires the combined statistics of FD3 and 
MIRT  to accomplish its main goals and hence in all scenarios is the third priority. This 
scenario is also based on the understanding that MIRT  and MCND  can be added at any 
time to the program should additional funds become available. In all scenarios we pre-
serve long-lead-time MIRT  elements to enable staging of the beam.
G3 experiment outside the US for direct detection of WIMP  dark matter. One G3 exper-
iment for direct detection of WIMP  dark matter can be supported at less than 50% level 
and only outside the US so that the SURF  expansion is not needed. The US will cede its 
leadership in this area.
Reduced increase in support for research. We identified four areas in which the current 
support for research requires reinforcement to regain or sustain US leadership: theory, 
general accelerator R&D, instrumentation, and computing. This scenario would reduce 
the level of this critically needed reinforcement.
8.4
US Support for Scientific Discovery
The field of particle physics entails curiosity-driven research that relies heavily on federal 
funding, which comes from taxpayers. We are grateful for that support.
This report discusses the difficult choices we made in our recommendations to 
maximize science output and make necessary investments in the future of the field with 
a long-term vision. Note that even a modest increase in the particle physics budget will 
allow for additional pathways to discovery by expanding the scope of science areas, 
accelerating projects, and investing more vigorously in the future. We listed additional 
opportunities in section 2.6.2.
Research in particle physics has an excellent track record of producing revolutionary 
technologies that enrich society as a whole (section 6.8). Pushing the boundaries of 
human knowledge requires bringing technology to the next level and training the next 
generation of scientists to become a technologically advanced workforce. Cutting-edge 
quantum technologies and AI advances are commonplace in particle physics. People 
trained in the field become a technologically advanced workforce in many areas of 
society. Knowledge is its crucial element. Investment in all areas of curiosity-driven 
research is critical for this foundation.
We are keen to bring knowledge and excitement of major innovations and discoveries 
to the people who paid for them. Join us as we explore the quantum universe.
 115
 
Appendix
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel
Dr. JoAnne Hewett  
Chair, High Energy Physics Advisory Panel 
Theory Group, Mail Station 81  
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory  
2575 Sand Hill Road  
Menlo Park, California  94403  
Dear Dr. Hewett: 
The 2014 report of the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel (P5), developed under 
the auspices of the High Energy Physics Advisory Panel (HEPAP), successfully laid out a 
compelling scientific program that recommended world -leading facilities with exciting 
new capabilities, as well as a robust scientific research program.  That report was well 
received by the community, the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) and the National 
Science Foundation (NSF), and Congress as a well-thought-out and strategic plan that 
could be successfully implemented.  HEPAP’s 2019 review of the implementation of this 
plan demonstrated that many of the report’s recommendations are being realized, and the 
community has made excellent progress on the P5 science drivers.   
As the landscape of high-energy physics continues to evolve and the decadal timeframe 
addressed in the 2014 P5 report nears its end, we believe it is timely to initiate the next 
long-range planning guidance to the DOE and NSF.  To that end, we ask that you 
constitute a new P5 panel to develop an updated strategic plan for U.S. high-energy 
physics that can be executed over a 10 -year timeframe in the context of a 20 -year, globally 
aware strategy for the field.  
A critical element of this charge is to assess the continued importance of the science 
drivers identified by the 2014 P5 report and, if necessary, to identify new science drivers 
that have the potential to enable compelling new avenues of pursuit for particle physics. 
Specifically, we request that HEPAP 1) evaluate ongoing projects and identify potential 
new projects to address these science drivers; 2) make the science case for new facilities 
and capabilities that will advance the field and enhance U.S. leadership and global 
partnership roles; and 3) recommend a program portfolio that the agencies should pursue 
in this timeframe, along with any other strategic actions needed to ensure the broad 
success of the program in the coming decades.   
In developing the plan, we would like the panel to take into consideration several 
particularly relevant aspects of constructing a compelling and well-balanced portfolio:  
November 2, 2022Appendix 1 116
Charge to P5
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization PanelAppendix 1: Charge to P5 117
2 
A core tenet of the 2014 P5 Report is that particle physics is fundamentally a global  
enterprise.  Thus far, the U.S. program has achieved high impact through 
U.S. researchers participating in the programs at world- class facilities outside the 
U.S. and international researchers working at world- class U.S. facilities.  The 
recommendations developed for this report should carefully consider the current 
and future international landscape for particle physics.  The panel’s report should 
include an explicit discussion of the choices made in this context, including the 
extent to which it is necessary to construct, maintain, and/or upgrade leading 
U.S.hosted high-energy physics facilities so that our leadership position in the 
global scientific arena continues, while at the same time preserving the essential 
roles of, and contributions by, the National Laboratories and universities to global 
collaboration on large- scale initiatives.  
•A number of the projects recommended by the 2014 P5 report are still being built,
and the agencies take their commitments to complete them very seriously.
Understanding the continued strength of the science case for these projects is quite
valuable, and the panel should provide its assessment of these projects in this
context.
•A successful plan should maintain a balance of large, medium, and small projects
that can deliver scientific results throughout the decadal timeframe.  We do not
expect the panel to consider the large number of possible small -scale projects
individually, but advice on research areas where focused investments in smallscale
projects can have a significant impact is welcome.
•There are elements of DOE HEP -operated infrastructure that are a stewardship
responsibility for HEP.  Investments to maintain that infrastructure in a safe and
reliable condition are an HEP responsibility and are outside the scope of the panel.
Major infrastructure upgrades that create new science capabilities are within the
scope of the charge and should be considered by the panel.
•Successfully exploiting a newly built project requires funding for the
commissioning and operation of the project and to support the researchers who will
use these new capabilities to do world -leading science.  Funding is also needed for
research and development (R&D) that develops new technologies for future
projects.  Scientists and techn ical personnel working in experimental particle
physics often contribute to all these project phases, while theoretical physics
provides both the framework to evolve our fundamental understanding of the
known universe as well as the innovative concepts that will expand our knowledge
into new frontiers.  The panel should deliver a research portfolio that will balance
all these factors and consider related issues such as training and workforce
development.
•Both NSF and DOE are deeply committed to diversity, equity, inclusion, and
accessibility principles in all the scientific communities they support.  Creating a
more diverse and inclusive workforce in particle physics will be necessary to•
Appendix 1: Charge to P5 118
 
3  
  
   implement the plan that this panel recommends, and the panel may fur ther 
recommend strategic actions that could be taken to address or mitigate barriers to 
achieving these goals.    
• Broad national initiatives relevant to the science and technology of particle physics 
have been developed by the administration and are being implemented by the 
funding agencies.  These include, but are not limited to, investments in advanced 
electronics and instrumentation, artificial intelligence and machine learning, and 
quantum information science.  Potential synergies between these initiatives and 
elements of the recommended portfolio should be considered.  
  
We request that the panel include these con siderations in their deliberations and discuss 
how they affect their recommendations in the report narrative.    
  
The panel’s report should identify priorities and make recommendations for an optimized 
particle physics program over 10 years, FY 2024– FY 20 33, under the following budget 
scenarios:  
  
1) Increases of 2.0 percent per year during fiscal years 2024 to 2033 with the FY 2024 
level calculated from the FY 2023 President’s Budget Request for HEP.   
2) Budget levels for HEP for fiscal years 2023 to 2027 specified in the Creating 
Helpful Incentives to Produce Semiconductors and Science Act of 2022, followed 
by increases of 3.0 percent per year from fiscal years 2028 to 2033.    
  
The recommended projects and initiatives should be implementable under reasonable 
assumptions and be based on generally accepted estimates of science reach and capability.  
Estimated costs for future projects and facility operations should be given particular 
scrutiny and may be adjusted if the panel finds it prudent to do so.  Given the long 
timescales for realizing these initiatives, we expect the funding required to enable the 
priorities the panel identifies may extend well past the 10 -year budget profile, but any 
recommendation should be technically and fiscally plausible to execute in a 20- year 
timeframe.  
  
In addition to a rticulating the scientific opportunities that can and cannot be pursued in the 
various scenarios, the panel may provide their opinions on the approximate overall level of 
support that is needed for core particle physics research and advanced technology R&D  
programs to be successful in the context of the science goals of the recommended plan.    
  
We expect the “Snowmass” community planning reports and HEPAP’s 2022 study on 
international benchmarking of scientific resources and capabilities will be useful in puts 
and that the panel will make efforts to maximize community input and participation in the 
overall process.  Coordination and congruence with the National Academies of Sciences, 
Engineering, and Medicine’s recent and ongoing decadal studies in astronom y, 
astrophysics, and particle physics are also important considerations.  
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization PanelAppendix 1: Charge to P5 119
 
4  
  
     
Finally, effective communication about the excitement, impact, and vitality of particle 
physics that can be shared with a general audience and other disciplines continues to be 
critical when advocating the strategic plan.  It would be particularly valuable if the panel 
could re -state the key scientific questions that drive the field so that they are accessible to 
non-specialists and crisply articulate the value of basic research and  the broader benefits of 
particle physics on other sciences and society.   
  
We would appreciate the panel’s preliminary comments by August 2023 and a final report 
by October 2023.  We recognize that this is a challenging task; nevertheless, your 
assessmen ts will be an essential input to planning at both the DOE and NSF.    
  
  
          Sincerely,  
  
     
  
Asmeret Asefaw Berhe      Sean L. Jones  
Director, Office of Science      Assistant Director  
U.S. Department of Energy      Directorate for Mathematical and  
   Physical Sciences  
National Science Foundation  
  
  

Appendix 2 120
HEPAP T ransmittal Letters
____________________________________________________________________________________ 
The University of New Mexico · MSC07 4220 ·  1 University of New Mexico · Albuquerque NM 87131- 0001 
Phone 505 .277.2616 · Fax 505 .277.1520 · physics.unm.edu 
210 Yale Blvd NE · Albuquerque NM 87106
8 December 2023 
Dr. Asmeret  Asepa w Berhe  
Director, Office of Science 
U.S. Department  of Energy  
Dr. C. Denise  Caldwell 
Acting Assistant  Director 
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical  Sciences 
National  Science  Foundation  
Dear Dr. Berhe and Dr. Caldwell: 
The report of the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel (P5), “ Explorin g the Quantum Universe,” 
was presented to HEPAP at its meeting on Dec 7 and 8, 2023.  This report addresses the charge “to 
develop a strategic plan f or U.S. high-energy p hysics that can be executed over a 10-year timeframe i n 
the context of a 20-year, globally aware s trategy for the field.”   At the meeting,  P5 Chair Hitoshi 
Murayama and P5 Deputy C hair Karsten Heeger reviewed the report and i ts recommendations and 
respon ded t o questions. 
Following d iscussion a nd deliberation , HEPAP approved the P5 report.  The HEPAP members commend 
P5 for th e success w ith which, starting  with i nput from the particle p hysics c ommunity, i t developed a 
strategic plan for the field.  HEPAP also notes the quality of the report in addressing the charge and 
expresses its appreciation t o the m embers of P5 for the effort that the subpanel devoted to the process.  
HEPAP strongly endorses the strategic plan presented in the P5 report and supports its immediate 
implementation. 
With  this letter,  on behalf  of HEPAP,  I submit for your consideration the final report of P5. 
Respectfully 
Sally Seidel  
Interim Chair, High Energy Physics Advisory Panel  
On behalf  of the members of HEPAP:  
Halina Abramowicz  
Luis Anchordoqui  
Ayana Arce  
Kenneth Bloom  
R. Sekhar Chivukula
Sarah Cousineau
Brenna FlaugherThomas Giblin  
Sudhir Malik  
Reina Maruyama  
Yasuhiro Okada  
Mayly Sanchez  
Heidi Schellman  
Monika Schleier -Smith  Marcelle Soares -Santos 
Philip Tanedo  
Jesse Thaler  
Natalia Toro  

Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization PanelAppendix 2: HEPAP Transmittal Letters  121
 
____________________________________________________________________________________  
 
The University of New Mexico · MSC07 4220 ·  1 University of New Mexico · Albuquerque NM 87131 -0001 
Phone 505. 277.2616 · Fax 505 .277.1520 · physics.unm.edu  
210 Yale Blvd NE · Albuquerque NM 87106  
8 May 2024  
 
Dr. Harriet Kung  
Acting Director, Office of Science  
U.S. Department of Energy  
 
Dr. C. Denise Caldwell  
Acting Assistant Director  
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences  
National Science Foundation  
 
Dear Dr. Kung  and Dr. Caldwell:  
 
The report of the Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel  (P5), "Exploring the Quantum Universe," 
was presented to HEPAP at its meeting on December  7 and 8, 2023.  This report addresses the charge "to 
develop a strategic plan for U.S. high -energy physics that can be executed over a 10 -year timeframe in the 
context of a 20 -year, globally aware strategy for the field."  At the meeting, P5 Chair Hitoshi Murayama 
and P5 Deputy Chair Karsten Heeg er reviewed the report and its recommendations and responded to 
questions.  
 
Following discussion and deliberation, HEPAP approved the P5 report  pending some small corrections 
intended to clarify without revising the recommendations .  The HEPAP members commen d P5 for the 
success with which, starting with input from the particle physics community, it developed a strategic plan 
for the field.  HEPAP also note s the quality of the report in addressing the charge and expresse s its 
appreciation to the members of P5 for the effort that the subpanel devoted to the process.  HEPAP 
strongly e ndorses the strategic plan presented in the P5 report and supports its immediate implementation.  
With this letter, on behalf of HEPAP, I submit for your consideration the final report of P5.  
 
Respectfully , 
 
 
 
Sally Seidel  
Chair, High Energy Physics Advisory Panel  
 
On behalf  of the members of HEPAP:  
  
Halina Abramowicz  
Luis Anchordoqui  
Ayana Arce  
Kenneth Bloom  
R. Sekhar Chivukula  
Sarah Cousineau  Brenna Flaugher  
Thomas Giblin  
Sudhir Malik  
Reina Maruyama  
Yasuhiro Okada  
Mayly Sanchez  Heidi Schellman 
Monika Schleier -Smith  
Marcelle Soares -Santos  
Philip Tanedo 
Jesse Thaler  
Natalia Toro  

Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle PhysicsAppendix 3 122
Panel Members
Shoji Asai
University of Tokyo
Amalia Ballarino
CERN
Tulika Bose
University of Wisconsin–Madison
Kyle Cranmer
University of Wisconsin–Madison
Francis-Yan Cyr-Racine
University of New Mexico
Sarah Demers
Yale University
Cameron Geddes
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Yuri Gershtein
Rutgers University
Karsten Heeger, Deputy Chair
Yale University
Beate Heinemann
DESY
JoAnne Hewett, HEPAP  Chair,  
ex officio until May 2023
SLAC  National Accelerator Laboratory
Patrick Huber
Virginia Tech
Kendall Mahn
Michigan State University
Rachel Mandelbaum
Carnegie Mellon University
Jelena Maricic
University of Hawaii at Manoa
Petra Merkel
Fermi National Accelerator LaboratoryChristopher Monahan
William & Mary
Hitoshi Murayama, Chair
University of California, Berkeley
Peter Onyisi
University of Texas at Austin
Mark Palmer
Brookhaven National Laboratory
Tor Raubenheimer
SLAC  National Accelerator Laboratory/  
Stanford University
Mayly Sanchez
Florida State University
Richard Schnee
South Dakota School of Mines  
& Technology
Sally Seidel, Interim HEPAP  Chair,  
ex officio since June 2023
University of New Mexico
Seon-Hee Seo
IBS Center for Underground Physics, 
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory
Jesse Thaler
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Christos Touramanis
University of Liverpool
Abigail Vieregg
University of Chicago
Amanda Weinstein
Iowa State University
Lindley Winslow
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Tien-Tien Yu
University of Oregon
Robert Zwaska
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization PanelAppendix 4 123
Process and 
Meetings
Information gathering phase
February 6, 2023 . Kickoff meeting with 
the Department of Energy ( DOE ) and the  
National Science Foundation ( NSF)
Open Town Halls, all with short remarks. 
Live captioning and American Sign Lan-
guage interpretation was provided at the 
town halls.
a.  Berkeley National Lab: February 22, 
23. 513 registrants
b.  Fermilab/Argonne National Lab: 
March 21, 22, 23. 797 registrants, 
partially overlapped with Elementa-
ry Particle Physics 2024  (EPP2024 ) 
town hall
c.  Brookhaven: April 12, 13. 666  
registrants
d.  SLAC : May 3, 4. 512 registrants.
 
Virtual Town Halls
a.  University of Texas at Austin: June 5. 
159 registrants, exclusive session for 
early career physicists.
b.  Virginia Tech, June 27. 119  
registrants
Keeping the community informed
1.  American Physical Society’s ( APS’s)  
Division of Particles and Fields  
session on P5 (April 15)
2.  Early Career Network Workshop  
(June 8,9)
3.  CE Science Workshop (June 14,15)
4.  CEPC  Workshop (July 6)5. ICFA  (July 15)
6. HEPAP  (August 7)
7. HEP-PI Meeting (August 15)
8. CEPC  Workshop (October 22)
9. ICFA  Seminar (November 30)
We used the APS DPF and Division of Phys-
ics and Beams mailing lists, Snowmass 
mailing list, and the P5 website to send out 
information about the P5 activities.
Deliberation Phase
(closed meetings)
1. May 31 to June 2, Austin, TX
2. June 21 to 23, Gaithersburg, MD
3. July 11 to 14, Santa Monica, CA
4. August 1 to 4, Denver, CO
Meetings by working groups, with additional 
input from the following:
Agencies: Asmeret Berhe, Harriet Kung, 
Sean Jones, Saúl González, DOE /HEP, 
NSF/PHY, NSF/AST (Debra Fisher, Nigel 
Sharp), NSF/OPP (Jim Ulvestad)
Government:  Cole Donovan (Department 
of State, Office of Science and Technology 
Policy)
Community:  International Benchmarking 
Panel, computing frontier, DPF leadership, 
previous P5 (Steve Ritz, Andy Lankford), 
Committee of Visitors’ reports (Ritchie Pat -
terson, Dmitry Denisov)
National Laboratories: Oak Ridge Nation-
al Laboratory, Thomas Jefferson National 
Accelerator Facility (Jefferson Lab)
Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle PhysicsAppendix 4: Process and Meetings 124
Writing Phase
(Zoom meetings)
5.  Five full-day meetings  
(August 11, 18, 25, September 1, 8)
6.  Short meetings  
(weekly since September 14)
Peer-Review Process
The draft report was sent to the following 
people for a peer review on October 25 
with a very tight deadline of October 31. 
We received many invaluable comments. 
The input and comments we received did 
not change the contents of the recommen-
dations, but helped us improve the clarity 
and presentation of our report significantly. 
Hereby we acknowledge their help.
Elena Aprile
Columbia University
William Barletta
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
John Carlstrom
University of Chicago
Mu-Chun Chen
University of California, Irvine
Sekhar Chivukula
University of California, San Diego
André de Gouvêa
Northwestern University
Josh Frieman
University of Chicago
Elizabeth Hayes
NASA  Goddard Space Flight Center
Katrin Heitmann
Argonne National Laboratory
David Hertzog
University of Washington, SeattleMark Messier
Indiana University
Laura Reina
Florida State University
Andrei Seryi
Jefferson Lab
Hirohisa Tanaka
SLAC  National Accelerator Laboratory
John Womersley
University of Edinburgh
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization PanelAppendix 5 125
Subcommittee 
on Cost, Risks, 
and Schedule
Charge
(March 1, 2023 )
The cost/schedule/risk subcommittee to 
P5 is asked to obtain and clarify the cost, 
schedule, and risk information from the 
proponents of high cost ( >$250M  in FY23$ ) 
HEP projects funded or being considered 
for funding by DOE  and/or NSF. The sub-
committee will not prepare its own esti-
mates. The subcommittee should assess 
this information at a high level, noting key 
assumptions, risks, and cost and schedule 
uncertainties including the risk from non-
DOE /NSF funding sources, international 
partners making in-kind contributions and 
collaborations, and missing costly items, 
if any. The subcommittee is also asked to 
comment on the operation costs for proj -
ects during commissioning and when the 
resulting facilities are in steady-state op-
eration. This subcommittee will provide P5 
with the expert opinions on the uncertainty 
ranges for the projects that P5 needs in 
order to develop a strategy for the field 
within assumed budgetary constraints. The 
subcommittee will submit their preliminary 
report to P5 in early summer.
Members
Jay Marx, Chair
California Institute of Technology
Gil Gilchriese, Matthaeus Leitner
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Giorgio Apollinari, Doug Glenzinski
Fermi National Accelerator LaboratoryJohn Seeman, Mark Reichanadter,  
Nadine Kurita
SLAC  Accelerator National Laboratory
Jon Kotcher, Srini Rajagopalan
Brookhaven National Laboratory
Allison Lung
Jefferson Lab
Harry Weerts
Argonne National Laboratory
Process
1.  Single contact person for each proj-
ect determined
2.  Set of 20 questions sent to project 
with answers requested in 1 week
3.  Divided committee into eight sub-
groups of three members each with 
a designated lead for each project
 •  Each member involved in two of 
the eight projects
 •  Possible conflicts of interest 
taken account in assignment to 
subgroups
 • Assignment matrix
Based on the inputs from the proponents 
and experience of the subcommittee mem-
bers, they provided three possible funding 
and schedule scenarios:
•  The low estimate is meant to be 
possible but optimistic—most things 
have to go right.
•  The mid-range estimate is meant to 
be moderately probable.
•  The high estimate is meant to be 
pessimistic but not unlikely.
The subcommittee report was  
received on June 30, 2023 .
Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle PhysicsAppendix 6 126
Important  
References
Building for Discovery: Strategic Plan  
for US Particle Physics in the Global 
Context,  
https://www.usparticlephysics.org/2014-
p5-report/
HEPAP  Assessment of Progress on 2014  
P5 Report, (March 2020 ), 
https://science.osti.gov/-/media/hep/he-
pap/pdf/Reports/HEPAP-Assessment-of-
Progress-on-2014-P5-Report-(2020).pdf
The Path to Global Discovery: U.S. Lead-
ership and Partnership in Particle Physics, 
https://science.osti.gov/-/media/hep/
hepap/pdf/202203/International_Bench-
marking_HEPAP_2023112.pdf
Report of the Committee of Visitors,  
Office of High Energy Physics, to the 
High Energy Physics Advisory Panel,  
https://science.osti.gov/-/media/sc-2/pdf/
cov-hep/2021/HEP_COV_2020_Report.
pdf
Report of the 2023  Committee of Visitors, 
Division of Physics, National Science 
Foundation,  
https://www.nsf.gov/od/oia/activities/cov/
mps/2023/2023_MPS_PHY_COV_Re-
port.pdf
DOE  Basic Research Needs for High 
Energy Physics—Detector Research and 
Development,
https://www.osti.gov/servlets/purl/1659761Report of the 2021  U.S. Community 
Study on the Future of Particle Physics 
(Snowmass 2021 ), Summary Chapter, 
Joel N. Butler et al.,  
https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.06581
The Future of US Particle Physics—The 
Snowmass 2021  Energy Frontier Report, 
Meenakshi Narain et al.,  
https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.11084
Snowmass Neutrino Frontier Report,  
Patrick Huber et al.,  
https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.08641
Snowmass Report of the Frontier For 
Rare Processes and Precision  
Measurements, Marina Artuso et al.,  
https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.04765
Snowmass Cosmic Frontier Report,  
Aaron Chou et al.,  
https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.09978
Snowmass Theory Frontier Report,  
Nathaniel Craig et al.,  
https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.05772
Snowmass’ 21 Accelerator Frontier  
Report, S. Gourlay et al.,  
https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.14136
Report of the Instrumentation Frontier 
Working Group for Snowmass 2021 ,  
Phillip Barbeau et al.,  
https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.14111
The Future of High Energy Physics  
Software and Computing, V. Daniel Elvira 
et al.,  
https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.05822
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization PanelAppendix 6: Important References 127
Snowmass 2021  Underground Facilities 
& Infrastructure Frontier Report, Laura 
Baudis et al.,  
https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.13450
Community Engagement Frontier, Ketevi 
A. Assamagan et al.,  
https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.13210
Snowmass Early Career, Garvita Agarwal 
et al.,  
https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.12004
Report of the Snowmass 2021   
Implementation Task Force, Thomas 
Roser et al.,  
https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.06030
2020  Update of the European Strategy 
for Particle Physics,  
https://cds.cern.ch/record/2721370/files/
CERN-ESU-015-2020_Update_Europe-
an_Strategy.pdf
European Astroparticle Physics Strategy 
2017 –2026 , Mid-Term Update 2023 , 
https://www.appec.org/roadmap
Decadal Survey on Astronomy and  
Astrophysics 2020  (Astro2020 ), 
https://www.nationalacademies.org/
ourwork/decadal-surveyon-astrono-
my-and-astrophysics-2020-astro2020
A New Era of Discovery: The 2023  Long 
Range Plan for Nuclear Science,  
https://nuclearsciencefuture.org/
Canadian Subatomic Physics  
Long-Range Plan,  
https://subatomicphysics.ca/Update of the Japanese Strategy for  
Particle Physics,  
https://www.jahep.org/files/snow-
mass2021_loi_JapaneseStrategy.pdf
Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle PhysicsAppendix  7 128
 1 A vote will be held on December 8, 2023, by the members of the HEPAP panel, regarding 
acceptance of the P5 Report.  On the basis of recommendations received from the U.S. DOE 
General Counsel, which are based on review of the financial disclosures of the HEPAP members, 
the following members of the panel have been determined to have conflicts of interest due to 
their employment at US national laboratories ; they will not participate in the vote for or against 
acceptance of the P5 Report.   
 
BRENNA FLAUGHER, FNAL employee 
HEIDI SCHELLMAN, FNAL employee 
MONIKA  SCHLEIER-SMITH, SLAC employee 
NATALIA  TORO, SLAC employee 
 
Each member of HEPAP will abstain from discussion of topics as indicated below.  These 
abstentions to not affect that member's permission to participate in the vote on the report.  
LUIS ANCHORDOQUI will have participation restrictions regarding his employer, Lehman 
College, City University of New York.  He may participate in HEPAP matters that affect his 
employer, so long as they are policy matters that do not affect the employer uni quely and 
specifically.   
AYANN ARCE will have participation restrictions regarding her employer, Duke 
University.  She may participate in HEPAP matters that affect her employer, so long as they are 
policy matters that do not affect the employer uniquely and specifically.   
KENNETH BLOOM will have participation restrictions regarding his employer, the University 
of Nebraska-Lincoln.  He may participate in HEPAP matters that affect his employer, so long as 
they are policy matters that do not affect the employer uniquely and sp ecifically.    
SARAH COUSINEAU will have participation restrictions regarding her employers, Oak Ridge 
National Laboratory/UT-Battelle, LLC and the University of Tennessee.   She may participate in 
HEPAP matters that affect her employers, so long as they are policy matter s that do not affect the 
employers uniquely and specifically.    
BRENNA FLAUGHER will have participation restrictions regarding her employer, 
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory/Fermi Research Alliance, LLC.   She may participate in 
HEPAP matters that affect her employer, so long as they are policy matters that do not affect the 
employer uniquely and specifically.   
THOMAS GIBLIN will have participation restrictions regarding his employer, Kenyon 
College.  He may participate in HEPAP matters that affect his employer, so long as they are 
policy matters that do not affect the employer uniquely and specifically.    
SUDHIR MALIK will have participation restrictions regarding his employer, the University of 
Puerto Rico.  He may participate in HEPAP matters that affect his employer, so long as they are 
policy matters that do not affect the employer uniquely and specific ally.    Conflict of Interest Resolution
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization PanelAppendix 7: Conflict of Interest Resolution 129
 2 REINA MARUYAMA will have participation restrictions regarding her employer, Yale 
University.  She may participate in HEPAP matters that affect her employer, so long as they are 
policy matters that do not affect the employer uniquely and specifically.   
MAYLY SANCHEZ will have participation restrictions regarding her employer, Florida State 
University.  She may participate in HEPAP matters that affect her employer, so long as they are 
policy matters that do not affect the employer uniquely and specificall y.    
HEIDI SCHELLMAN will have participation restrictions regarding her employers, 
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory/Fermi Research Alliance, LLC and Oregon State 
University.  She may participate in HEPAP matters that affect her employers, so long as they a re 
policy matters that do not affect the employers uniquely and specifically.  
MONICA SCHLEIER-SMITH will have participation restrictions regarding her employer, 
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory/Stanford University.   She may participate in HEPAP 
matters that affect her employer, so long as they are policy matters that do not affe ct the 
employer uniquely and specifically.   
SALLY SEIDEL will have participation restrictions regarding her employer, the University of 
New Mexico.  She may participate in HEPAP matters that affect her employer, so long as they 
are policy matters that do not affect the employer uniquely and specific ally.   
MARCELLE SOARES-SANTOS will have participation restrictions regarding her employer, the 
University of Michigan.  She may participate in HEPAP matters that affect her employer, so long 
as they are policy matters that do not affect the employer uniquely and specifically.   
PHILIP TANEDO will have participation restrictions regarding his employer, the University of 
California, Riverside.  He may participate in HEPAP matters that affect his employer, so long as 
they are policy matters that do not affect the employer uniquely a nd specifically.   
JESSE THALER will have participation restrictions regarding his employer, the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology.  He may participate in HEPAP matters that affect his employer, so long 
as they are policy matters that do not affect the employer uniquely and specifically.   
NATALIA TORO will have participation restrictions regarding her employer, Stanford 
University/SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory.   She may participate in HEPAP matters that 
affect her employer, so long as they are policy matters that do not affect the em ployer uniquely 
and specifically.  She will also have participation restrictions regarding TRIUMF and TRIUMF’s 
Particle Physics Experiment Advisory Committee.    
Submitted on 5 December 2023, 
 
Sally Seidel 
HEPAP Interim Chair 

Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle PhysicsAppendix 8 130
Acronyms  
& Glossary
Accelerator: A particle accelerator, which 
accelerates a beam of particles such as 
electrons, positrons, muons, or protons.
ACE: Accelerator Complex Evolution. A 
proposed major upgrade to the accelerator 
complex at Fermilab.
ACE-BR: Accelerator Complex Evolution 
Booster Replacement. A proposed major 
upgrade to the accelerator complex at 
Fermilab, including a replacement of the 
booster synchrotron, as part of ACE.
ACE-MIRT : Main Injector Ramp and Target 
is a proposed upgrade to Fermilab acceler-
ator complex to upgrade the beam to power 
of 2.1 MW; part of the re-envisioned DUNE  
Phase II. Included as a component of ACE.
ACORN : Accelerator Controls Operations 
Research Network. A project to modernize 
accelerator controls at Fermilab.
ADMX : Axion Dark Matter e Xperiment. An 
experiment aiming to detect a hypothetical 
particle called axion as a candidate of dark 
matter built at University of Washington, 
Seattle. Its second generation is called 
ADMX -G2.
AI/ML: Artificial intelligence/machine  
learning.ALP: Axion-like particle. A class of hypo-
thetical pseudoscalar particles, beyond the 
Standard Model. A generalization of the 
axion that relaxes the relationship between 
particle mass and coupling to the Standard 
Model.
AMF: Advanced Muon Facility. A proposed 
muon facility at Fermilab to produce bright 
beams of muons for charged lepton-flavor vi-
olation physics and other future experiments.
ANL: Argonne National Laboratory .
ASIC : Application-specific integrated circuits.
ASTAE : Advancing Science and Technol-
ogy through Agile Experiments. A portfolio 
of small-scale DOE experiments proposed 
in this report.
AST: Division of Astronomical Sciences . A 
division in NSF Mathematical and Physical 
Sciences focused on astronomical sciences.
AS&T : Accelerator science and technology.
ATLAS : An operating experiment at LHC, 
CERN . One of the two experiments respon-
sible for the discovery of the Higgs boson 
in 2012 .
Atom interferometer: A quantum sensor 
that uses a wave-like behavior of atoms. It 
is used for wave-like dark matter searches.
Atomic clock:  A high-precision clock 
that measures time using the resonant 
frequency of atoms, the basis of the defi-
nition of a second. It is used for dark matter 
searches through variations in fundamental 
constants.
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization PanelAppendix 8: Acronyms & Glossary 131
Antiparticle: A particle that has the same 
mass and the opposite electric charge of 
a given particle.
ATF: Accelerator Test Facility . A user fa-
cility at Brookhaven National Laboratory 
that supports experiments for advanced 
accelerator and laser research including 
research on technologies.
AUP: High-Luminosity LHC Accelerator 
Upgrade Project. The accelerator portion 
of the US contribution to HL-LHC providing 
critical components such as high-field “trip-
let” magnets using the Nb3Sn  technology.
Automatic differentiation: A set of tech-
niques for evaluating derivatives automat-
ically; widely used for optimization.
AWA : Argonne Wakefield Accelerator 
Facility . A facility to demonstrate elec-
tron-beam-driven wakefield acceleration 
technologies.
Axion: A hypothetical particle postulated 
to account for the rarity of processes that 
break charge-parity symmetry. It is very 
light, electrically neutral, and pseudoscalar.
BELLA : Berkeley Lab Laser Accelerator . 
A facility at Lawrence Berkeley Nation-
al Laboratory that uses intense lasers to 
drive wakefields in plasma for research on 
technologies.
Belle , Belle II : Belle  was an experiment 
that studied the properties of the bottom 
quark bound states and discovered CP 
violation in those systems. Belle II  is a suc-
cessor experiment that explores quantum 
imprints of new phenomena in these sys-tems. Both Belle  and Belle II  are hosted 
by KEK, a national accelerator laboratory 
in Japan.
BES: Beijing Spectrometer . A series of de-
tectors mounted at Beijing Electron Posi-
tron  Collider ( BEPC ). Both BEPC  and its 
upgrade, BEPC II , are hosted by Institute of 
High Energy Physics ( IHEP ) in China. The 
current detector is BES III , which explores 
quantum imprints.
BES: Basic Energy Sciences. An office 
within the DOE Office of Science performing 
basic science investigations into materials, 
chemistry, and geoscience.
BICEP : Background Imaging of Cosmic Ex-
tragalactic Polarization . An experiment that 
measures cosmic microwave background 
(CMB ) polarization, the oldest light in the 
universe, to understand questions about 
the beginning of the universe.
Big Bang: The unofficial name for the be-
ginning of the universe as a small patch of 
space with a huge amount of energy that 
expanded in an explosive fashion.
BNL: Brookhaven National Laboratory .
Booster: A proton synchrotron accelerator, 
part of the accelerator complex at Fermilab.
BSM: Beyond the Standard Model. A realm 
of particle physics not encompassed by the 
Standard Model of Particle Physics.
CAD: Computer-aided design software.  
A widely used mechanical engineering de-
sign tool.
Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle PhysicsAppendix 8: Acronyms & Glossary 132
CCC: Cool Copper Collider, a concept for 
a future particle accelerator using normal 
conducting copper accelerators cooled to 
cryogenic temperatures.
CERN : Conseil Européen pour la Recher-
che Nucléaire. An organization for nuclear 
research situated on the border of Switzer-
land and France.
CEvNS : Coherent elastic neutrino-  
nucleus scattering. A process of neutrino-  
nucleus scattering in which the nucleus 
acts like a single particle. First experimen-
tally observed in 2017  by the COHERENT   
experiment.
CHIPS : Creating Helpful Incentives to Pro-
duce Semiconductors ( CHIPS ) and Science 
Act of 2022 . New large-scale funding to 
boost domestic research and manufacturing 
of semiconductors in the US.
CLIC : Compact Linear Collider . A proposed 
accelerator designed as an addition to the 
CERN  accelerator complex.
CMB: Cosmic microwave background, the 
oldest light in the universe, emitted 380,000 
years after the Big Bang. It has become 
microwave radiation by the expansion of 
the universe, and it permeates the entire 
observable universe.
CMB -S4: Cosmic Microwave Background 
Stage IV. An experiment set to make pre-
cision measurements of the polarization 
of the CMB . It will constrain the physics of 
inflation in the early universe, light relics, 
and the properties of neutrinos among other 
science goals. It has two sites, the South 
Pole site and the Atacama desert in Chile.CMS: Compact Muon Solenoid. An oper-
ating experiment performed at the LHC, 
CERN ; one of the two experiments that 
discovered the Higgs boson in 2012 .
Collider: A particle accelerator that ac-
celerates beams of particles in opposite 
directions and then collides them to achieve 
very high-energy collisions.
CPAD : The Coordinating Panel for Ad-
vanced Detectors . A panel that seeks to 
promote, coordinate, and assist in the re -
search and development of instrumentation 
and detectors for high energy physics ex-
periments under the auspices of the Divi-
sion of Particles and Fields of the American 
Physical Society.
CP violation: Subtle differences between 
the behaviors of matter and antimatter. 
Under most circumstances, antimatter 
behaves almost exactly like matter in the 
mirror. If that behavior is not the case, it is 
said that the charge-parity symmetry ( CP) 
is violated.
CTA: Cherenkov Telescope Array . An ar-
ray of telescopes that study high-energy 
gamma rays from the universe. It is under 
construction on the Canary Islands, Spain, 
and at Paranal, Chile. The US is a member 
of the 25-nation consortium.
Dark energy: An unknown form of en-
ergy that makes up about 69% of energy 
in the universe today. Its existence has 
been inferred from the observation that 
the expansion of the universe is acceler-
ating today. One possibility is that it is the 
energy of the vacuum, called the cosmo-
logical constant, designated as Λ. Another 
possibility is that it is the slowly evolving 
energy density of a field.
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization PanelAppendix 8: Acronyms & Glossary 133
Dark matter: An unknown type of matter 
that makes up 84% of matter in the universe 
today. Its existence has been inferred from 
the rotation speed of stars and gas in gal-
axies, gravitational lensing due to clusters 
of galaxies, large-scale structure, and CMB  
measurements. Its gravitational pull was 
necessary to form stars and galaxies from 
the primordial gas.
Dark Matter ( DM) G2, G3: Generation 2 
and Generation 3 dark matter experiments. 
Generation 2 WIMP -search experiments 
comprise no more than a few tens of tons 
of target mass and are currently operat -
ing or under construction. Generation 3 
WIMP -search experiments will have tens to 
hundreds of tons of target mass, increasing 
the WIMP  sensitivity to neutrino fog level.
Dark photons: Hypothetical particles from 
hidden sectors proposed as force carriers 
similar to photons, but potentially associ-
ated with dark matter.
DarkSide- 20k: An experiment aiming at 
direct detection of dark matter, focusing on 
the WIMP  dark matter particle search. It is 
located in the Gran Sasso Underground 
Laboratory in Italy.
DARPA : Defense Advanced Research  
Projects Agency .
DES: Dark Energy Survey . An experiment 
that mapped out hundreds of millions of 
galaxies and detected supernovae, looking 
for patterns in cosmic structure in order to 
reveal the nature of the dark energy that is 
accelerating the expansion of the universe.DESC : Dark Energy Science Collaboration. 
A group of scientists that study fundamental 
physics using data from The Vera C. Rubin 
Observatory’s Legacy Survey of Space and 
Time ( LSST ).
DESI , DESI -II: Dark Energy Spectroscopic 
Instrument. A spectroscopic galaxy survey 
at the Mayall 4m telescope at Kitt Peak 
National Observatory in Arizona.
DMNI : Dark Matter New Initiatives. A suite of 
innovative agile dark matter experiments set 
to search for various forms of dark matter.
DOE: Department of Energy . Its Office of 
Science is the largest funding agency for 
physical sciences and includes the Office 
of High Energy Physics, which supports 
particle physics research.
DUNE : Deep Underground Neutrino  
Experiment. An experiment that studies the 
oscillation of neutrinos over 800 miles, a 
macroscopic quantum phenomenon. The 
beam of neutrinos is created artificially at 
Fermilab in Illinois and directed toward 
the Sanford Underground Research Facil-
ity in South Dakota, where the neutrinos 
are detected and studied in the DUNE  Far 
Detectors.
eBOSS : Extended Baryon Oscillation  
Spectroscopic Survey . A project carried 
out as part of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey 
(SDSS -IV) on a 2.5m telescope at Apache 
Point Observatory in New Mexico.
EDM: Electric dipole moment, a possible 
interaction of an electric field with spin  
of an elementary particle. If it exists for 
an elementary particle, it would break the 
time reversal symmetry and is a form of 
CP violation.
Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle PhysicsAppendix 8: Acronyms & Glossary 134
EIC: Electron-Ion Collider . A new facili-
ty colliding electrons and protons, under 
construction at BNL in support of the DOE 
Nuclear Physics program.
FACET -II: Facility for Advanced Acceler-
ator Experimental Tests. An accelerator 
facility at SLAC  National Accelerator Lab-
oratory that provides high-energy electron 
beams for researching particle accelerator 
technologies.
FAST : Fermilab Accelerator Science and 
Technology . A facility including a fully- 
equipped R&D accelerator chain to support 
research and development of accelerator 
technology for the next generation of par-
ticle accelerators.
FASER2 : Forward Search Experiment at 
the HL-LHC. A proposed experiment to look 
for new long-lived particles. It builds on the 
success of the FASER  experiment and is 
proposed to be housed at the FPF. 
FCC: Future Circular Collider . A future 
particle accelerator complex planned at 
CERN  to support the FCC-ee and FCC-hh 
in a new underground tunnel with 91 km 
circumference.
FCC-ee: A proposed electron-positron 
Higgs factory in the FCC tunnel, possibly 
an intermediate step toward the FCC-hh 
collider.
FCC-hh: A proposed proton-proton collider 
in the FCC tunnel that will push the energy 
about seven times higher than that of the 
current LHC.FD3, FD4: The third and fourth far detector 
modules of the DUNE  experiment, locat -
ed at the Sanford Underground Research  
Facility ( SURF ) in South Dakota.
Fermilab: Fermi National Accelerator  
Laboratory . A US National Laboratory  
focused on particle physics research locat-
ed in Batavia, Illinois.
FES: Fusion Energy Sciences. An office 
in the DOE  Office of Science performing 
investigations into fusion energy sources, 
and the corresponding science of matter 
at very high temperatures and densities.
Fifth force: A new hypothetical force, be-
yond the four fundamental forces of nature 
(gravitational, electromagnetic, weak, and 
strong force).
FORMOSA : An experiment to search for 
millicharged particles in the LHC collisions. 
It builds on the experience of the MilliQan 
experiment and is proposed to be housed 
at the FPF.
FPF: Forward Physics Facility . A proposed 
underground facility to operate several hun-
dred meters away from ATLAS during the 
LHC-HL running, with several new exper-
iments aligned with ATLAS  collision axis.
FPF trio: The bundled request for US fund-
ing for three of the proposed experiments at 
FPF, including FASER2 , FORMOSA , and the 
Forward Liquid Argon Experiment ( FLArE )
FY23 : Fiscal Year 2023 , spanning from  
October 1, 2022  to September 30, 2023 .
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization PanelAppendix 8: Acronyms & Glossary 135
GARD : General Accelerator Research and 
Development program with the DOE Office 
of High Energy Physics. GARD  develops 
advanced technologies for the acceleration 
of particles for HEP and other applications.
Geometric deep learning: A broad 
class of machine learning ( ML) approach-
es that take into account symmetries and 
invariances.
GeV: Giga-electron-volt. A unit of energy 
that is approximately equal to the proton’s 
mass times the speed of light squared 
(E=mc2).
Graph neural networks: A method in AI 
inspired by the way the human brain func-
tions, applied to graph represented data.
Gravitational lensing: Focusing of light 
due to the gravity of mass concentrations 
bending light such that it is magnified 
over large distances. Gravitational lens-
ing is used in the investigation of dark 
matter, dark energy, and other astrophys-
ical phenomena.
Gravitational waves: Ripples of space-
time caused by extremely energetic events 
in the universe such as pairs of black holes 
or neutron stars that coalesce on inspiraling 
orbit. Gravitational waves have been re-
cently discovered with terrestrial detectors 
and are an evolving astrophysical probe of 
particle physics.
HELEN : Higgs-Energy Lepton. An elec-
tron-positron linear collider based on ad-
vances in superconducting radio frequency 
technology.HEP: High Energy Physics. An office in the 
DOE  Office of Science.
HEPAP : High Energy Physics Advisory 
Panel. A committee that reports to the as-
sociate director of DOE HEP and assistant 
director of NSF’s Directorate of Mathemat-
ical and Physical Sciences ( DMP ).
HL-LHC: High-Luminosity LHC . High-  
luminosity upgrade to the Large Hadron 
Collider.
Hidden sectors:  Particles and quantum 
fields described by their mediator particles, 
that have been hypothesized, but have not 
been observed yet, possibly due to their 
small couplings.
Higgs boson: A fundamental particle that 
is believed to be condensed throughout the 
universe as the Higgs field, the heart of the 
Standard Model of particle physics. It is 
responsible for giving mass to fundamental 
particles such as quarks and leptons.
Higgs factory: A particle accelerator that 
collides beams of electrons and positrons, 
to produce about a million Higgs bosons 
in order to study the particle’s precise 
properties.
IceCube : An astrophysical neutrino obser-
vatory , located at the South Pole, utilizing 
1km3 of Antarctic ice as a target for neutrino 
detection. IceCube has produced a picture 
of the Milky Way galaxy in neutrinos.
IceCube -Gen2 : A proposed expansion of 
IceCube  that will employ optical and radio 
detection methods to cover a broad range 
of neutrino energies.
Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle PhysicsAppendix 8: Acronyms & Glossary 136
ICFA : International Committee for Future 
Accelerators. A body of the International 
Union of Pure and Applied Physics created 
to facilitate international collaboration in 
the construction and use of accelerators 
for particle physics.
ILC: International Linear Collider . A pro-
posed future electron positron collider 
using superconducting radio frequency 
technology.
ITN: ILC Technology Network. A network 
of international institutions set to advance 
ILC-related technology in selected areas 
toward engineering design and to ex-
plore opportunities for other accelerator 
applications.
IMCC : International Muon Collider Col-
laboration. An international collaboration 
formed to develop the R&D and planning 
as a pathway toward a collider of muons 
and anti-muons.
Inflation: A period of exponential expan-
sion of the universe in a fraction of a sec-
ond after the Big Bang. It is hypothesized 
to have expanded the size of the universe 
more than a billion trillion times and seeded 
quantum fluctuations that became stars 
and galaxies.
INSPIRE : A one-stop information platform 
for the HEP community, comprising eight 
interlinked databases on literature, confer-
ences, institutions, journals, researchers, 
experiments, jobs, and data. Run in collab-
oration by CERN , DESY , Fermilab, IHEP , 
IN2P3 , and SLAC , it has been serving the 
scientific community for almost 50 years.IOTA : Integrable Optics Test Accelerator 
ring. The primary focus of the FAST  accel-
erator R&D facility, IOTA  is a circular accel-
erator testing nonlinear and other advanced 
approaches to particle beam technology.
J-PARC : The Japan Proton Accelerator 
Research Complex, jointly operated by 
KEK and the Japan Atomic Energy Asso-
ciation. J-PARC  provides proton beams for 
T2K, COMET , and other particle physics 
experiments.
kBELLA : A proposed technology test facil-
ity of new plasma wakefield acceleration 
techniques that use high-power lasers 
to accelerate particles within very short 
distances.
KEK: High Energy Accelerator Research 
Organization in Japan, which hosts many 
particle physics experiments and co-oper-
ates J-PARC  with the Japan Atomic Energy 
Agency.
LAr: Liquid argon (cooled to cryogenic 
temperatures) used as a detector medi-
um for neutrino, collider, and dark matter 
experiments.
LARP : US LHC  Accelerator Research  
Program. A program in the US that studied 
possible improvements on the LHC, which 
led to AUP.
LArTPC : Liquid argon time-projection 
chamber, a detector technology for neutron 
experiments and other particle physics.
LQCD : Lattice quantum chromodynamics. 
A tool to carry out non-perturbative theo-
retical calculations to describe properties 
of hadrons, which are composed of quarks 
and gluons.
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization PanelAppendix 8: Acronyms & Glossary 137
LBNF : Long Baseline Neutrino Facility . 
A world-class facility hosting the DUNE  
experiment and providing the long-base -
line neutrino beam.
LBNL : Lawrence Berkeley National  
Laboratory .
ɅCDM : The current paradigm to describe 
the evolution of the universe from the Big 
Bang to today, based on the cosmological 
constant ( Λ, lambda) and cold dark matter 
(CDM ), with fluctuation of densities seeded 
by inflation.
LCLS : Linac Coherent Light Source. The 
world’s first hard X-ray free-electron laser 
located at SLAC  National Accelerator Lab -
oratory supported by DOE  Basic Energy 
Sciences.
LCLS -II, LCLS -II-HE: Linac Coherent Light 
Source- II and its upgrade. The world’s first 
MHz rate hard X-ray free-electron laser  
located at SLAC National Accelerator  
Laboratory.
Lepton: A collective name for elementary 
matter particles that do not participate in 
the strong interaction—namely electron, 
muon, tau, three neutrinos, and their anti-
matter counterparts.
LHC: Large Hadron Collider . The world’s 
largest and highest-energy accelerator, 
located at CERN , Switzerland.
LHCb : Large Hadron Collider beauty . An 
experiment that primarily studies systems 
of bottom quark produced by the collisions 
in the LHC.LIM: Line intensity mapping. A proposed 
method to create 3D maps of the universe 
using emission lines from atoms or mol-
ecules redshifted to longer wavelengths.
LSND : Liquid Scintillator Neutrino Detector. 
A completed neutrino-oscillation experiment 
that reported an anomaly, suggesting exis-
tence of more than three neutrino species. 
Currently tested by SBN experiments at 
Fermi National Laboratory.
LSST : Legacy Survey of Space and Time. 
A 10-year survey that the Vera C. Rubin 
Observatory will carry out.
LZ: LUX-ZEPLIN. An experiment for direct 
detection of dark matter at SURF , searching 
for WIMP s. It is a TPC filled with 7 , 000 kg of 
liquified xenon.
MagLab: The national High Magnetic Field 
Laboratory at Florida State University.
Magnetometer: A device that precisely  
measures magnetic field and magnetic  
dipole moment.
MATHUSLA : Massive Timing Hodoscope 
for Ultra Stable Neutral Particles. A pro-
posed surface detector at HL-LHC to search 
for hypothetical neutral long-lived particles 
(LLPs).
MCND : More Capable Near Detector. An 
upgraded DUNE  Near Detector that is part 
of DUNE  reinvisioned Phase II. 
MPS : Directorate of Mathematical and 
Physical Sciences, within the National  
Science Foundation ( NSF).
Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle PhysicsAppendix 8: Acronyms & Glossary 138
MRI: Major Research Instrumentation  
program. An NSF funding program for multi-  
user research instruments costing up to 
$4M.
MSRI : Mid-Scale Research Infrastructure. 
An NSF funding program to build experi -
ments and facilities in the cost range of 
$4M–20M (MSRI -1) or $20M –100M  (MSRI -2) 
(information for FY2023 ).
Muon collider: A circular particle accel-
erator that steers and collides beams of 
muons and anti-muons.
Mu2e, Mu2e-II: Muon to electron  
conversion experiment and its proposed  
upgrade, stationed at Fermilab, set to 
search for physics BSM .
Muon g-2: An experiment  at Fermilab that 
performed the most precise measurement 
of the muon anomalous magnetic moment.
MW: Megawatt, a unit of power equal to 
one million watts, used to measure proton 
beam power as the production of protons 
per second, and the total energy per proton.
Nanofabrication: Manufacturing materials 
at the nanometer scale.
NASA : National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration.
Nb3Sn: Niobium Three Tin. A supercon-
ducting material characterized by the abil-
ity to sustain high currents and magnetic 
fields; used in particle accelerators such as 
HL-LHC and nuclear magnetic resonance.New physics: Phenomena that cannot be 
described by the currently known laws of 
physics, such as the Standard Model of par-
ticle physics or ɅCDM  model of cosmology.
Neutrino: The most abundant known mas-
sive fundamental particles, a billion times 
more abundant than particles that make up 
the matter that surrounds us. Neutrinos are 
neutral, weakly interacting, and extremely 
light. They rarely interact with matter, so 
intense sources or huge detectors are re-
quired in order to observe their interactions 
and study their properties.
Neutrino fog: An irreducible background 
for WIMP  dark matter search due to neutrino 
interactions in the dark matter detectors 
that mimic the WIMP  signals. Due to the 
extremely small probability of neutrino in-
teraction, only the G3 dark matter detectors 
will be large enough to start seeing neutrino 
interactions from the atmospheric neutrino 
flux passing through detectors.
Neutrino Platform: CERN ’s main  
contribution to a globally coordinated  
program of neutrino research, providing  
access for European researchers. It in-
cludes an R&D facility at CERN  to devel-
op and prototype the next generation of 
neutrino detectors, including Icarus, Baby 
MIND  and ProtoDUNE . It also includes direct 
contributions to experiments, such as the 
cryostats for the DUNE  detectors.
NNSA : National Nuclear Security Agency , 
an agency within the US Department of 
Energy.
NOvA : NuMI Off-axis v e Appearance.  
A long-baseline neutrino oscillation exper-
iment, operating in Ash River, Minneso-
ta, detecting the neutrino beam sent from  
Fermilab, 500 miles away.
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization PanelAppendix 8: Acronyms & Glossary 139
NSAC : Nuclear Science Advisory Commit-
tee, which provides official advice to DOE 
and NSF on the national program for basic 
nuclear science research.
NSF: National Science Foundation. A 
US federal funding agency for basic and  
applied science.
NSF/PHY: Division of Physics in the NSF 
Directorate of Mathematical and Physical 
Sciences ( MPS ).
nuSTORM : Neutrinos from Stored Muons. 
A proposed facility that can provide elec-
tron- and muon-neutrino beams from the 
decay of low-energy muons confined in a 
storage ring.
Offshore: Located outside the US.
Onshore:  Located in the territory of the US.
OPP: Office of Polar Programs, an NSF 
program responsible for the logistics and 
much of the operations of the South Pole 
Station.
ORISE : Oak Ridge Institute for Science and 
Education. Office that provided logistical 
support for P5 panel meetings and travel 
needs.
P5: Particle Physics Project Prioritization 
Panel, jointly commissioned by DOE  and 
NSF, under the auspices of HEPAP , to de-
velop a detailed strategic plan for US par-
ticle physics over the next 10 years, with 
a 20-year vision.PDG: Particle Data Group. An international 
collaboration led by LBNL  that publishes a 
biannual compilation of important data in 
particle physics.
Parton: Point-like, seemingly fundamen-
tal, constituent of a hadron (a composite 
particle consisting of two or more quarks 
held together by a strong force). Sometimes 
also used to describe other fundamental 
particles.
Positron: Anti-electron. A positively 
charged elementary particle with mass 
identical to an electron. It is an antiparticle 
to the electron.
pCM: Parton center-of-momentum. A mea-
sure of how much energy is available for 
the creation of heavy particles in particle 
collisions. For elementary particle colli-
sions, such as between an electron and 
positron, the parton center-of-momentum 
and beam center-of-momentum are es-
sentially the same. For composite particle 
collisions, like those between protons, the 
parton center-of-momentum is substantially 
lower than the beam center-of-momentum 
because the actual collisions are of the 
partonic constituents (quarks and gluons 
in the case of protons).
PIP, PIP-II: Proton Improvement Plan and 
its successor. An enhancement to the Fer-
milab accelerator complex, powering the 
world’s most intense high-energy neutrino 
beam.
Plasma wakefield: A technology devel-
oped for compact, high-gradient acceler-
ators whereby a witness bunch is accel-
erated by the oscillating electric field in a 
plasma, which is created by other particle 
or laser beams.
Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle PhysicsAppendix 8: Acronyms & Glossary 140
ProtoDUNE : Kiloton-scale prototype LArT -
PC detectors that serve as technology dem-
onstrators for DUNE  Far Detectors and are 
roughly one-tenth the size of far detectors 
generally. ProtoDUNE  detectors are part 
of the CERN Neutrino Platform program.
QCD: Quantum chromodynamics. A theory 
of strong interaction between quarks, me-
diated by particles called gluons.
QIS: Quantum information science, tech-
nologies for computation, information pro-
cessing, and detection that elude classical 
limitations through the use of quantum 
effects.
Quantum calorimeter: A quantum sen-
sor for thermal measurement of quanta of 
energy for dark photon, dark matter, and 
other hidden sector searches.
Quark: A collective name for elementa-
ry matter particles that do participate in 
the strong interaction—namely, up, down, 
strange, charm, bottom, and top quark, and 
their antimatter counterparts.
R&D: Research and development. Efforts 
to develop technology and techniques for 
new experiments and facilities that extend 
capability, reduce costs, or reduce risk.
RDCs : Research and development collab-
orations, which develop technologies and 
techniques for future experiments.
RF: Radio frequency, a portion of the elec-
tromagnetic spectrum ranging from kHz 
to GHz. In particle physics, RF is used to 
directly accelerate particles and as a de-
tection technique.RHIC : Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider , parti-
cle collider, currently operating at Brookha-
ven National Laboratory.
Rubin: Vera C. Rubin Observatory . An 8m 
telescope built on Cerro Pachón ridge in 
Chile that will perform the LSST .
SLAC : SLAC  National Accelerator  
Laboratory .
Snowmass: A scientific study conducted 
by the particle physics community to plan 
a scientific vision for the future.
SBN: Short Baseline Neutrino Program is 
an experimental program at Fermilab.
SNB: Supernova neutrino burst, a phenom-
enon in which many neutrinos are produced 
in a short period of time before a supernova 
explosion occurs.
SNOLAB : A deep underground research 
laboratory located near Sudbury, Ontario, 
Canada.
Spec -S5: A proposed Stage- V ground-
based spectroscopic experiment to mea-
sure inflation parameters and dark energy 
from medium galaxy redshifts. It follows 
the Stage- IV DESI  experiment.
srEDM : Electric Dipole Moment using Stor -
age Rings. A proposed experiment to mea-
sure EDM  of protons using an electrostatic 
storage ring.
SRF: Superconducting radio-frequency, 
also SCRF , where the RF resonators are 
fashioned of superconducting materials, 
such that the energy dissipation is lowered.
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization PanelAppendix 8: Acronyms & Glossary 141
SURF : Sanford Underground Research 
Facility . A facility hosting a suite of exper-
iments for rare event searches including 
DUNE , located in Lead, South Dakota.
SuperCDMS : Super Cryogenic Dark Mat-
ter Search experiment, currently under 
construction at SNOLAB , set to search for 
low-mass WIMP s.
SuperKEKB : An electron-positron collider 
located at KEK, Tsukuba, Japan.
SWGO : The Southern Wide-field Gamma-  
ray Observatory . A ground-based gamma-  
ray detector for mapping large-scale emis-
sion and providing access to the full sky 
for transient and variable multi-wavelength 
and multi-messenger phenomena.
Synchrotron: A type of circular particle 
accelerator in which the resonant radio fre-
quency is synchronized to the changing 
velocity of the particles.
T2K: Tokai to Kamioka. A long-baseline 
neutrino experiment operating in Japan. 
A neutrino beam is sent from the J-PARC  
proton accelerator facility to the Super-  
Kamiokande  detector in the Kamioka mine 
over a distance of 295 km .
TeV: Tera-electron-volt. A unit of energy 
that is 1000  times larger than a GeV, or 
giga electron volt.
TPC: Time projection chamber. A type of 
tracking detector of particles. It drifts ion-
ization electrons to the end of the chamber 
by a uniform electric field and measures 
the distance from the end plates by the 
drift time.WIMP : Weakly interacting massive parti -
cle. One of the most promising dark matter 
candidates.
XENON -nT: A direct detection dark matter 
experiment , focusing on WIMP  dark matter 
particle search. It is operating in the Gran 
Sasso Underground Laboratory in Italy.
ZEUS : Zettawatt-Equivalent Ultrashort 
pulse laser System , a facility at the Uni -
versity of Michigan that uses intense la-
sers to drive high intensity science includ-
ing wakefields in plasma and research on 
technologies.
Full List of  
Recommendations 142
Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle Physics
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization PanelFull List of Recommendations 143
For convenience, we gather here the full list of recommendations 
from the report, with the caveat that some meaning may be lost 
when taken out of context.
Recommendation 1: As the highest priority independent of the budget scenarios, com-
plete construction projects and support operations of ongoing experiments and research 
to enable maximum science.
We reaffirm the previous P5 recommendations on major initiatives:
a.  HL-LHC (including ATLAS  and CMS  detectors, as well as Accelerator Upgrade Project) 
to start addressing why the Higgs boson condensed in the universe (reveal the se-
crets of the Higgs boson, section 3.2), to search for direct evidence for new particles  
(section 5.1), to pursue quantum imprints of new phenomena (section 5.2), and to 
determine the nature of dark matter (section 4.1).
b.  The first phase of DUNE and PIP-II to open an era of precision neutrino measurements 
that include the determination of the mass ordering among neutrinos. Knowledge of 
this fundamental property is a crucial input to cosmology and nuclear science ( elu-
cidate the mysteries of neutrinos, section 3.1).
c.  The Vera C. Rubin Observatory to carry out the Legacy Survey of Space and Time 
(LSST ), and the LSST  Dark Energy Science Collaboration, to understand what drives 
cosmic evolution (section 4.2).
In addition, we recommend continued support for the following ongoing experiments at 
the medium scale (project costs > $50M  for DOE and > $4M  for NSF ), including completion 
of construction, operations and research:
d. NOvA , SBN, T2K, and IceCube  (elucidate the mysteries of neutrinos, section 3.1).
e.  DarkSide -20k, LZ, SuperCDMS , and XENONnT  (determine the nature of dark matter, 
section 4.1).
f. DESI  (understand what drives cosmic evolution, section 4.2).
g. Belle II , LHCb , and Mu2e  (pursue quantum imprints of new phenomena, section 5.2).
Recommendation 2: Construct a portfolio of major projects that collectively study nearly 
all fundamental constituents of our universe and their interactions, as well as how those 
interactions determine both the cosmic past and future. 
These projects have the potential to transcend and transform our current paradigms. They 
inspire collaboration and international cooperation in advancing the frontiers of human 
knowledge. Plan and start the following major initiatives in order of priority from highest 
to lowest:
a.  CMB -S4, which looks back at the earliest moments of the universe to probe physics 
at the highest energy scales. It is critical to install telescopes at and observe from 
both the South Pole and Chile sites to achieve the science goals (section 4.2).
Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle PhysicsFull List of Recommendations 144
b.  A re-envisioned second phase of DUNE with an early implementation of an enhanced 
2.1 MW beam— ACE-MIRT —a third far detector, and an upgraded near-detector 
complex as the definitive long-baseline neutrino oscillation experiment of its kind 
(section 3.1).
c.  An offshore Higgs factory, realized in collaboration with international partners, in 
order to reveal the secrets of the Higgs boson. The current designs of FCC-ee and 
ILC meet our scientific requirements. The US should actively engage in feasibility 
and design studies. Once a specific project is deemed feasible and well-defined (see 
also Recommendation 6), the US should aim for a contribution at funding levels com- 
mensurate to that of the US involvement in the LHC and HL-LHC, while maintaining 
a healthy US onshore program in particle physics (section 3.2).
d.  An ultimate Generation 3 (G3) dark matter direct detection experiment reaching the 
neutrino fog, in coordination with international partners and preferably sited in the 
US (section 4.1).
e.  IceCube Gen-2, for study of neutrino properties complementary to DUNE and for indirect 
detection of dark matter covering higher mass ranges, using non-beam neutrinos as a tool.  
(section 4.1).
Recommendation 3: Create an improved balance between small-, medium-, and large- 
scale projects to open new scientific opportunities and maximize their results, enhance 
workforce development, promote creativity, and compete on the world stage.
To achieve this balance across all project sizes we recommend the following:
a.  Implement a new small-project portfolio at DOE , Advancing Science and Technolo-
gy through Agile Experiments ( ASTAE ), across science themes in particle physics 
with a competitive program and recurring funding opportunity announcements. This 
program should start with the construction of experiments from the Dark Matter New 
Initiatives ( DMNI ) by DOE -HEP (section 6.2).
b.  Continue Mid-Scale Research Infrastructure ( MSRI ) and Major Research Instru-
mentation ( MRI) programs as a critical component of the NSF research and project 
portfolio.
c.  Support DESI -II for cosmic evolution, LHCb  upgrade II and Belle II  upgrade for quan-
tum imprints, and US contributions to the global CTA Observatory for dark matter 
(sections 4.2, 5.2, and 4.1).
 The Belle II  recommendation includes contributions towards the Super -KEKB  accelerator.
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization PanelFull List of Recommendations 145
Recommendation 4: Support a comprehensive effort to develop the resources—  
theoretical, computational, and technological—essential to our 20-year vision for the field. 
This includes an aggressive R&D program that, while technologically challenging, could 
yield revolutionary accelerator designs that chart a realistic path to a 10 TeV pCM collider.
Investing in the future of the field to fulfill this vision requires the following:
a.  Support vigorous R&D toward a cost-effective 10 TeV pCM collider based on proton, 
muon, or possible wakefield technologies, including an evaluation of options for 
US siting of such a machine, with a goal of being ready to build major test facili-
ties and demonstrator facilities within the next 10 years (sections 3.2, 5.1, 6.5, and 
Recommendation 6).
b.  Enhance research in theory to propel innovation, maximize scientific impact of invest-
ments in experiments, and expand our understanding of the universe (section 6.1).
c.  Expand the General Accelerator R&D (GARD ) program within HEP, including stew-
ardship (section 6.4).
d. Invest in R&D in instrumentation to develop innovative scientific tools (section 6.3).
e.  Conduct R&D efforts to define and enable new projects in the next decade, including 
detectors for an e+e– Higgs factory and 10 TeV pCM collider, Spec -S5, DUNE  FD4, 
Mu2e -II, Advanced Muon Facility, and line intensity mapping (sections 3.1, 3.2, 4.2, 
5.1, 5.2, and 6.3).
f.  Support key cyberinfrastructure components such as shared software tools and a 
sustained R&D effort in computing, to fully exploit emerging technologies for projects. 
Prioritize computing and novel data analysis techniques for maximizing science across 
the entire field (section 6.7).
g.  Develop plans for improving the Fermilab accelerator complex that are consistent 
with the long-term vision of this report including neutrinos, flavor, and a 10 TeV pCM 
collider (section 6.6).
Recommendation 5: Invest in initiatives aimed at developing the workforce, broadening 
engagement, and supporting ethical conduct in the field. This commitment nurtures an ad-
vanced technological workforce not only for particle physics, but for the nation as a whole.
The following workforce initiatives are detailed in section 7:
a.  All projects, workshops, conferences, and collaborations must incorporate ethics 
agreements that detail expectations for professional conduct and establish mecha-
nisms for transparent reporting, response, and training. These mechanisms should 
be supported by laboratory and funding agency infrastructure. The efficacy and 
coverage of this infrastructure should be reviewed by a HEPAP  subpanel.
b.  Funding agencies should continue to support programs that broaden engagement 
in particle physics including strategic academic partnership programs, traineeship 
programs, and programs in support of dependent care and accessibility. A systematic 
review of these programs should be used to identify and remove barriers.
Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle PhysicsFull List of Recommendations 146
c.  Comprehensive work-climate studies should be conducted with the support of fund-
ing agencies. Large collaborations and national laboratories should consistently 
undertake such studies so that issues can be identified, addressed, and monitored. 
Professional associations should spearhead field-wide work-climate investigations to 
ensure that the unique experiences of individuals engaged in smaller collaborations 
and university settings are effectively captured.
d.  Funding agencies should strategically increase support for research scientists, re-
search hardware and software engineers, technicians, and other professionals at 
universities.
e.  A plan for dissemination of scientific results to the public should be included in the 
proposed operations and research budgets of experiments. The funding agencies 
should include funding for the dissemination of results to the public in operation and 
research budgets.
Recommendation 6: Convene a targeted panel with broad membership across particle 
physics later this decade that makes decisions on the US accelerator-based program at 
the time when major decisions concerning an offshore Higgs factory are expected, and/or 
significant adjustments within the accelerator-based R&D portfolio are likely to be needed. 
A plan for the Fermilab accelerator complex consistent with the long-term vision in this 
report should also be reviewed.
The panel would consider the following:
a.  The level and nature of US contribution in a specific Higgs factory including an evalu-
ation of the associated schedule, budget, and risks once crucial information becomes 
available.
b.  Mid- and large-scale test and demonstrator facilities in the accelerator and collider 
R&D portfolios.
c.  A plan for the evolution of the Fermilab accelerator complex consistent with the long- 
term vision in this report, which may commence construction in the event of a more 
favorable budget situation.
Area Recommendation 1: Increase DOE HEP -funded university-based theory research 
by $15 million per year in 2023  dollars (or about 30% of the theory program), to propel 
innovation and ensure international competitiveness. Such an increase would bring the-
ory support back to 2010  levels. Maintain DOE  lab-based theory groups as an essential 
component of the theory community.
 
Area Recommendation 2: For the ASTAE  program to be agile, we recommend a broad, 
predictable, recurring, and preferably annual call for proposals. This ensures the flexibility 
to target emerging opportunities and fields. A program on the scale of $35 million per year 
in 2023  dollars is needed to ensure a healthy pipeline of projects.
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization PanelFull List of Recommendations 147
Area Recommendation 3: To preserve the agility of the ASTAE  program, project man-
agement requirements should be outlined for the portfolio and should be adjusted to be 
commensurate with the scale of the experiment.
Area Recommendation 4: A successful ASTAE  experiment involves 3 phases: design, 
construction, and operations. A design phase proposal should precede a construction 
proposal, and construction proposals are considered from projects within the group that 
have successfully completed their design phase.
Area Recommendation 5: The DMNI  projects that have successfully completed their 
design phase and are ready to be reviewed for construction should form the first set of 
construction proposals for ASTAE . The corresponding design phase call would be open 
to proposals from all areas of particle physics.
Area Recommendation 6: Increase the budget for generic Detector R&D by at least 
$20 million per year in 2023  dollars. This should be supplemented by additional funds for 
the collider R&D program.
Area Recommendation 7: The detector R&D  program should continue to leverage 
national initiatives such as QIS, microelectronics, and AI/ML .
Area Recommendation 8: Increase annual funding to the General Accelerator R&D 
program by $10M  per year in 2023  dollars to ensure US leadership in key areas.
Area Recommendation 9: Support generic accelerator R&D with the construction of 
small-scale test facilities. Initiate construction of larger test facilities based on project 
review and informed by the collider R&D program.
Area Recommendation 10: To enable targeted R&D before specific collider projects 
are established in the US, an investment in collider detector R&D funding at the level of 
$20M  per year and collider accelerator R&D at the level of  $35M  per year in 2023  dollars 
is warranted.
Area Recommendation 11: To successfully deliver major initiatives and leading global 
projects, we recommend that:
a.  National laboratories and facilities should work with funding agencies to establish 
and maintain streamlined access policies enabling efficient remote and on-site  
collaboration by international and domestic partners.
b.  National laboratories should prioritize the facilitation of procurement processes and 
ensure robust technical support for experimenters.
c.  National laboratories and facilities should prioritize the creation and maintenance  
of a supportive, inclusive, and welcoming culture.
Exploring the Quantum Universe: Pathways to Innovation and Discovery in Particle PhysicsFull List of Recommendations 148
Area Recommendation 12: Form a dedicated task force, to be led by Fermilab with 
broad community membership. This task force is to be charged with defining a roadmap 
for upgrade efforts and delivering a strategic 20-year plan for the Fermilab accelerator 
complex within the next five years for consideration (Recommendation 6). Direct task 
force funding of up to $10M  should be provided.
Area Recommendation 13: Assess the booster synchrotron and related systems for 
reliability risks through the first decade of DUNE  operation, and take measures to pre-
emptively address these risks.
Area Recommendation 14: To provide infrastructure for neutrino and/or dark matter 
experiments, we recommend DOE  fund the cavern outfitting of the SURF  expansion.
Area Recommendation 15: Maintaining the capabilities of NSF’s infrastructure at the 
South Pole, focused on enabling future world-leading scientific discoveries, is essential. 
We recommend continued and critically important direct coordination and planning be-
tween NSF-OPP and the CMB -S4 and IceCube -Gen2  projects.
Area Recommendation 16: Resources for national initiatives in AI/ML , quantum com-
puting, and microelectronics should be leveraged and incorporated into research and 
R&D efforts to maximize the physics reach of the program.
Area Recommendation 17: Add support for a sustained R&D effort at the level of $9M 
per year in 2023  dollars to adapt software and computing systems to emerging hardware, 
incorporate other advances in computing technologies, and fund directed efforts to tran-
sition those developments into systems used for operations of experiments and facilities.
Area Recommendation 18: Through targeted investments at the level of $8M per year 
in 2023  dollars, ensure sustained support for key cyberinfrastructure components. This 
includes widely used software packages, simulation tools, information resources such 
as the Particle Data Group and INSPIRE , as well as the shared infrastructure for preser-
vation, dissemination, and analysis of the unique data collected by various experiments 
and surveys in order to realize their full scientific impact.
Area Recommendation 19: Research software engineers and other professionals at 
universities and labs are key to realizing the vision of the field and are critical for main-
taining a technologically advanced workforce. We recommend that the funding agencies 
embrace these roles as a critical component of the workforce when investing in software, 
computing, and cyberinfrastructure.
Area Recommendation 20: HEPAP , potentially in collaboration with international part-
ners, should conduct a dedicated study aiming at developing a sustainability strategy for 
particle physics.
Report of the 2023  Particle Physics Project Prioritization PanelAcknowledgments 149
Members of the particle physics community at the Fermilab Town Hall, March 2023 . Photo: Ryan Postel, Fermilab
We thank members of the cost subcommittee, in particular its chair, Jay Marx, for their 
timely and hard work. We also thank all the national laboratories that made their staff 
available for this important task. We thank people at funding agencies for providing 
us all necessary information and support throughout the process. We thank our peer 
reviewers for giving us constructive feedback under a tight deadline. We thank Law-
rence Berkeley National Laboratory, Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, Argonne 
National Laboratory, Brookhaven National Laboratory, SLAC  National Laboratory, Virginia 
Tech University, and University of Texas Austin for hosting the town halls. We thank 
James Dawson and Marty Hanna for professional editing. We thank Michael Branigan, 
Brad Nagle, Olena Shmahalo, and Abigail Malate for providing beautiful graphics and 
layout. We thank the Yale Physics Department for supporting the development of the 
usparticlephysics.org website. We thank Kerri Fomby, Jody Crisp, and Taylor Pitchford 
at ORISE  and Stephany Tone at LBNL  for logistical support. We thank our families for 
supporting us during this year-long process. And most importantly, we thank the American 
Physical Society Division of Particles and Fields for organizing the Snowmass Com-
munity Study, and all members of our community for their bold and creative vision as 
well as their input to the process.
In Memoriam 150
Courtesy of Ulrich Heintz
Meenakshi Narain, a highly  
respected member of the particle 
physics community, was a  
member of this panel. We were 
greatly saddened when she 
passed away on January 1, 
2023 . We express our deepest 
condolences to her family.  
Her passing was a devastating 
loss to our community.

2023p5report.org
Pathways to Innovation 
and Discovery  
in Particle Physics
Report of the 2023 Particle Physics Project 
Prioritization Panel
doi: https://doi.org/10.2172/2368847Exploring
theQuantumUniverse
A strategic plan for the High Energ y Physics Advisory Panel
